https://epdf.pub/justice-for-hedgehogs0167cf6f1125b329da5e19a6f9440b0956228.html

1 Baedeker (1)
Foxes and HedgehogsThis book defends a large and old philosophical thesis: the unity of value. It is not a plea for animal rights or for punishing greedy fund managers. Its title refers to a line by an ancient Greek poet, Archilochus, that Isaiah Berlin made famous for us. The fox knows many things, but the hedgehog knows one big thing.① Value is one big thing. The truth about living well and being good and what is wonderful is not only coherent but mutually supporting: what we think about any one of these must stand up, eventually, to any argument we find compelling about the rest. I try to illustrate the unity of at least ethical and moral values: I describe a theory of what living well is like and what, if we want to live well, we must do for, and not do to, other people.

That idea—that ethical and moral values depend on one another—is a creed; it proposes a way to live. But it is also a large and complex philosophical theory. Intellectual responsibility about value is itself an important value, and we must therefore take up a broad variety of philosophical issues that are not normally treated in the same book. We discuss in different chapters the metaphysics of value, the character of truth, the nature of interpretation, the conditions of genuine agreement and disagreement, the phenomenon of moral responsibility, and the so-called problem of free will as well as more traditional issues of ethical, moral, and legal theory. My overall thesis is unpopular now—the fox has ruled the roost in academic and literary philosophy for many decades, particularly in the Anglo-American tradition.② Hedgehogs seem naïve or charlatans, perhaps even dangerous. I shall try to identify the roots of that popular attitude, the assumptions that account for these suspicions. In this introductory chapter I offer a road map of the argument to come that shows what I take those roots to be.

My advance summary could start in any chapter, fanning out from there, tracing the implications of that chapter for the rest. But I think it best to start at the end of the book, with political morality and justice, so that readers particularly interested in politics will have an advance understanding of why I think that the more abstract philosophical discussions of the book are required steps to what concerns them most. I hope that starting the summary there will also encourage other readers whose greater interest lies in more mainstream issues of philosophy—meta-ethics, metaphysics, and meaning—to find practical importance in what they might believe to be abstruse philosophical issues.

Justice

Equality. No government is legitimate unless it subscribes to two reigning principles. First, it must show equal concern for the fate of every person over whom it claims dominion. Second, it must respect fully the responsibility and right of each person to decide for himself how to make something valuable of his life. These guiding principles place boundaries around acceptable theories of distributive justice—theories that stipulate the resources and opportunities a government should make available to people it governs. I put the matter that way, in terms of what governments should do, because any distribution is the consequence of official law and policy: there is no politically neutral distribution. Given any combination of personal qualities of talent, personality, and luck, what a person will have by way of resource and opportunity will depend on the laws in place where he is governed. So every distribution must be justified by showing how what government has done respects these two fundamental principles of equal concern for fate and full respect for responsibility.

A laissez-faire political economy leaves unchanged the consequences of a free market in which people buy and sell their product and labor as they wish and can. That does not show equal concern for everyone. Anyone impoverished through that system is entitled to ask: “There are other, more regulatory and redistributive, sets of laws that would put me in a better position. How can government claim that this system shows equal concern for me?” It is no answer that people must take responsibility for their own fate. People are not responsible for much of what determines their place in such an economy. They are not responsible for their genetic endowment and innate talent. They are not responsible for the good and bad luck they have throughout their lives. There is nothing in the second principle, about personal responsibility, that would entitle government to adopt such a posture.

Suppose government makes the extreme opposite choice, however: to make wealth equal no matter what choices people made for themselves. Every few years, as would be possible in a Monopoly game, government calls in everyone’s wealth and redistributes it in equal shares. That would fail to respect people’s responsibility to make something of their own lives, because what people chose to do—their choices about work or recreation and about saving or investment—would then have no personal consequences. People are not responsible unless they make choices with an eye to the costs to others of the choices that they make. If I spend my life at leisure, or work at a job that does not produce as much as I could of what other people need or want, then I should take responsibility for the cost this choice imposes: I should have less in consequence.

The question of distributive justice therefore calls for a solution to simultaneous equations. We must try to find a solution that respects both the reigning principles of equal concern and personal responsibility, and we must try to do this in a way that compromises neither principle but rather finds attractive conceptions of each that fully satisfy both. That is the goal of the final part of this book. Here is a fanciful illustration of a solution. Imagine an initial auction of all available resources in which everyone starts with the same number of bidding chips. The auction lasts a very long time, and will be repeated as long as anyone wishes. It must end in a situation in which nobody envies anybody else’s bundle of resources; for that reason the distribution of resources that results treats everyone with equal concern. Then imagine a further auction in which these people design and choose comprehensive insurance policies, paying the premium the market establishes for the coverage each chooses. That auction does not eliminate the consequences of good or bad luck, but it makes people responsible for their own risk management.

We can use that fanciful model to defend real-life distributive structures. We can design tax systems to model these imaginary markets: we can set tax rates, for instance, to mimic the premiums it seems reasonable to assume people would pay in the hypothetical insurance market. The rates of tax designed in that way would be fairly steeply progressive; more so than our tax rates at present. We can design a health care system mimicking the coverage it seems reasonable to assume people would seek: this would require universal health care. But it would not justify spending, as Medicare now does, enormous sums keeping people alive in the last few months of their lives, because it would make no sense for people to give up funds useful for the rest of their lives to pay the very high premiums required by that sort of coverage.

Liberty. Justice requires a theory of liberty as well as a theory of resource equality, and we must be aware, in constructing that theory, of the danger that liberty and equality will conflict. It was Isaiah Berlin’s claim that such conflict is inevitable. I argue, in Chapter 17, for a theory of liberty that eliminates that danger. I distinguish your freedom, which is simply your ability to do anything you might want to do without government constraint, from your liberty, which is that part of your freedom that government would do wrong to constrain. I do not endorse any general right to freedom. I argue, instead, for rights to liberty that rest on different bases. People have a right to ethical independence that follows from the principle of personal responsibility. They have rights, including rights to free speech, that are required by their more general right to govern themselves, which right also flows from personal responsibility. They have rights, including rights to due process of law and freedom of property, that follow from their right to equal concern.

This scheme for liberty rules out genuine conflict with the conception of equality just described because the two conceptions are thoroughly integrated: each depends on the same solution to the simultaneous equation problem. You cannot determine what liberty requires without also deciding what distribution of property and opportunity shows equal concern for all. The popular view that taxation invades liberty is false on this account provided that what government takes from you can be justified on moral grounds so that it does not take from you what you are entitled to retain. A theory of liberty is in that way embedded in a much more general political morality and draws from the other parts of that theory. The alleged conflict between liberty and equality disappears.

Democracy. But there is another supposed conflict among our political values. This is the conflict between equality and liberty, on the one hand, and the right to participate as an equal in one’s own governance, on the other. Political theorists sometimes call the latter a right to positive liberty and suppose that that right may conflict with negative liberty—the rights to freedom from government I just described—and also with the right to a just distribution of resources. The conflict is realized, on this view, when a majority votes for an unjust tax scheme or a denial of important liberties. I respond to that claim of conflict by distinguishing various conceptions of democracy. I distinguish a majoritarian or statistical conception from what I call the partnership conception. The latter holds that in a genuinely democratic community each citizen participates as an equal partner, which means more than just that he has an equal vote. It means that he has an equal voice and an equal stake in the result. On that conception, which I defend, democracy itself requires the protection of just those individual rights to justice and liberty that democracy is sometimes said to threaten.

Law. Political philosophers insist on yet another conflict among political values: the conflict between justice and law. Nothing guarantees that our laws will be just; when they are unjust, officials and citizens may be required, by the rule of law, to compromise what justice requires. In Chapter 19 I speak to that conflict: I describe a conception of law that takes it to be not a rival system of rules that might conflict with morality but as itself a branch of morality. It is necessary, to make that suggestion plausible, to emphasize what might be called procedural justice, the morality of fair governance as well as just outcome. It is also necessary to understand morality in general as having a tree structure: law is a branch of political morality, which is itself a branch of a more general personal morality, which is in turn a branch of a yet more general theory of what it is to live well.

You will by now have formed a suspicion. Poseidon had a son, Procrustes, who had a bed; he suited his guests to his bed by stretching or lopping them until they fit. You might well think me Procrustes, stretching and lopping conceptions of the great political virtues so that they neatly fit one another. I would then be achieving unity on the cheap: a meaningless victory. But I mean to submit each of the political conceptions I describe to the test of conviction. I will not rely on any assumption that a theory is sound just because it fits with other theories we also find agreeable. I hope to develop integrated conceptions that all seem right in themselves, at least after reflection. I do make an independent and very powerful claim, however. I argue throughout the book that in political morality integration is a necessary condition of truth. We do not secure finally persuasive conceptions of our several political values unless our conceptions do mesh. It is the fox who wins too easily: it is his apparent victory, now widely celebrated, that is hollow.

Interpretation

The first step toward that important conclusion, about integration and truth, requires facing up to an immediate challenge. I sketched a series of claims about the true meaning of a variety of political concepts. How can I show that one conception of equality or liberty or democracy is right and rival conceptions wrong? We must pause to consider what political concepts are and how we might be said to agree or disagree about their application. If you and I mean something entirely different by “democracy,” then our discussion about whether democracy requires that citizens have an equal stake is pointless: we are simply talking past one another. My claims about the best understanding of the political virtues would then count only as statements about how I propose to use certain words. I could not claim that I am right and others wrong.

We must ask: When do people share a concept so that their agreements and disagreements are genuine? We share some concepts because we agree, except in cases we all regard as borderline, about what criteria to use in identifying examples. We mainly agree about how many books there are on a table, for example, because we use the same tests in answering that question. We don’t always agree because our criteria are sometimes slightly different: we might disagree because you count a large pamphlet as a book and I don’t. In that special borderline case our disagreement is illusory: we don’t really disagree. Justice and the other political concepts are different, however. We think that our disagreements about whether progressive taxation is just are genuine even though we disagree, in some cases very sharply, about the right criteria for deciding whether an institution is just.

We must therefore recognize that we share some of our concepts, including the political concepts, in a different way: they function for us as interpretive concepts. We share them because we share social practices and experiences in which these concepts figure. We take the concepts to describe values, but we disagree, sometimes to a marked degree, about what these values are and how they should be expressed. We disagree because we interpret the practices we share rather differently: we hold somewhat different theories about which values best justify what we accept as central or paradigm features of that practice. That structure makes our conceptual disagreements about liberty, equality, and the rest genuine. It also makes them value disagreements rather than disagreements of fact or disagreements about dictionary or standard meanings. That means that a defense of some particular conception of a political value like equality or liberty must draw on values beyond itself: it would be flaccidly circular to appeal to liberty to defend a conception of liberty. So political concepts must be integrated with one another. We cannot defend a conception of any of them without showing how our conception fits with and into appealing conceptions of the others. That fact provides an important part of the case for the unity of value.

I describe interpretive concepts much more fully in Chapter 8. Chapter 7 takes up a more basic set of questions about interpretation. We interpret in many genres beyond politics: in conversation, law, poetry, religion, history, sociology, and psychodynamics. Can we provide a general theory of interpretation that holds for all these genres? We will better understand the standards that should govern our interpretation of the distinctly political concepts if we can. I describe a popular general theory of interpretation: that it always aims to retrieve the intention or other psychological state of some author or creator. That theory is apt in some circumstances in some genres and inapt in others; we need a more general theory of interpretation that explains when and why the intention-retrieval goal is plausible. I suggest a value-based general theory. Interpreters have critical responsibilities, and the best interpretation of a law or a poem or an epoch is the interpretation that best realizes those responsibilities on that occasion. The best interpretation of Yeats’s poem “Sailing to Byzantium” is the interpretation that deploys or assumes the best account of the value of interpreting poetry, and reads the poem so as to show its value in that light. But because interpreters disagree about their responsibilities, because they disagree about the value of interpreting poetry, they disagree about how to read that poem or any other object of interpretation.

Truth and Value

I argue, then, that political morality depends on interpretation and that interpretation depends on value. It has become obvious by now, I suppose, that I believe that there are objective truths about value. I believe that some institutions really are unjust and some acts really are wrong no matter how many people believe that they are not. The contrary view is now common, however. It seems absurd to a great many philosophers—and to a great many other people as well—to suppose that there are values “out there” in the universe awaiting discovery by human beings who have some mysterious faculty of value apprehension. We must understand value judgments, they say, in some wholly different way. We must accept that there is no objective truth about value that is independent of the beliefs or attitudes of people who judge value: we must understand their claims about what is just or unjust, right or wrong, saintly or wicked, as simply expressions of their attitudes or emotions, or recommendations for others to follow, or personal commitments they undertake, or proposed constructions of guides for their own lives.

Most of the philosophers who take this view do not think themselves pessimists or nihilists. On the contrary. They suppose that we can live perfectly good lives—and intellectually more responsible lives—if we give up the myth of objective in dependent values and concede that our value judgments only express our attitudes and commitments. Their arguments and examples show that they have our private lives rather than our politics in mind, however. I think them wrong about private lives: I argue in Chapter 9 that our dignity requires us to recognize that whether we live well is not just a matter of whether we think we do. But they are even more plainly wrong about politics: it is our politics, more than any other aspect of our lives, that denies us the luxury of skepticism about value.

Politics is coercive: we cannot stand up to our responsibility as governors or citizens unless we suppose that the moral and other principles on which we act or vote are objectively true. It is not good enough for an official or voter to declare that the theory of justice on which he acts pleases him. Or that it accurately expresses his emotions or attitudes or aptly states how he plans to live. Or that his political principles are drawn from his nation’s traditions and so need not claim larger truth.③ Any nation’s history and contemporary politics are a kaleidoscope of conflicting principle and shifting prejudice: any formulation of the nation’s “traditions” must therefore be an interpretation that, as Chapter 7 argues, must be rooted in independent assumptions about what is really true. Of course, people will disagree about which conception of justice is really true. But those in power must believe that what they say is so. So the old philosophers’ question—Can moral judgments really be true?—is a foundational, inescapable, question in political morality. We cannot defend a theory of justice without also defending, as part of the same enterprise, a theory of moral objectivity. It is irresponsible to try to do without such a theory.

I must now summarize what might seem philosophically the most radical view I defend: the metaphysical independence of value.④ It is a familiar, perfectly ordinary idea that some acts—torturing babies for—are wrong in themselves, not just because people think them wrong. They would still be wrong even if, incredibly, no one thought so. You might not believe that; some form of moral subjectivism might seem more plausible to you. But whether it is true is a matter of moral judgment and argument. Most moral philosophers think, on the contrary, that the idea of what they call “mind-independent” moral truth takes us outside morality into metaphysics, that it urges us to consider whether there are chimerical properties or entities “in the world” that are half moral—how else could they make mind-independent moral claims true?—but also half nonmoral—how else could they “ground” moral claims or make them objectively true? They urge a colonial philosophy: setting up embassies and garrisons of science within value discourse to govern it properly.

Ordinary people sometimes express the idea that some acts are wrong in themselves by referring to moral “facts”: “It is a moral fact that torture is always wrong.” Trouble arrives, however, when philosophers make a meal of these innocent references by supposing them to make a further claim that adds something to the initial moral claim: something metaphysical about moral particles or properties—we might call these “morons.” They therefore announce what I believe to be entirely bogus philosophical projects. They say that moral philosophy must aim to “reconcile” the moral and the natural worlds. Or to align the “practical” perspective we take when living our lives with the “theoretical” perspective from which we study ourselves as part of nature. Or to show how we can be “in touch” with the chimeras or, if we cannot, what reason we could have to think our moral opinions sound rather than mere accidents. These bogus questions and projects threaten puzzlement on all sides. Self-described “realists” try to make good on the projects, sometimes by claiming mysterious interaction between morons and ourselves. I discuss these attempts in Chapter 4. Self-described “anti-realists,” discovering that there are no morons in “the world,” or that in any case we have no way to be “in touch” with them, declare we must make up values for ourselves, an entirely bizarre assignment. How can they be values if we can just make them up? I describe these efforts in Chapter 3.

Each of these different “realist” and “anti-realist” projects evaporates when we take the independence of value seriously. Then there is no more need to “reconcile” a practical and a theoretical point of view than there is to reconcile physical facts about a book or psychological facts about its author with an interpretation of its poetry that ignores both. The only intelligible case for the “mind-independence” of some moral judgment is a moral argument showing that it would still be true even if no one thought it was; the only intelligible case against it is a moral argument for the opposite claim. In Chapter 6 I describe a theory of moral knowledge, responsibility, and conflict, and in Chapter 8 a theory of moral truth. These theories are drawn from within morality—they are themselves moral judgments. That is what independence means in moral philosophy. It is a natural and entirely familiar view: it is how we think. There is no noncircular argument against it. There is no argument that does not presuppose rather than establish a demand for philosophical colonialism.

Philosophers who deny independence insist on a distinction between two branches of moral philosophy. They distinguish between questions of morality—Does justice require universal health care?—and questions about morality—Can the claim that justice requires health care be true, or does it merely express an attitude? They call the former questions “substantive” or “first-order” questions and the latter “meta-ethical” or “second-order” questions. They assume that addressing meta-ethical issues requires philosophical argument rather than moral judgment. They then divide into the two camps I mentioned. Realists argue that the best nonmoral philosophical arguments show that moral judgment can indeed be objectively true, or are factual, or describe reality, or something of the sort. “Anti-realists” argue that the best arguments show exactly the contrary, whatever the contrary is. (Recently other philosophers have speculated whether these two views really are different and, if so, how to tell the difference.⑤)

The independence of value plays an important role in the more general thesis of this book: that the various concepts and departments of value are interconnected and mutually supporting. The daunting philosophers’ questions I mentioned seem to encourage a foxy response. Where do values come from? Are they really “out there” in the universe, part of what finally just is? If we understand these as metaphysical questions about the fundamental character of reality rather than questions calling for moral or value judgments, then we are well on the way to some important degree of pluralism about values. Suppose we think that values really are “out there” waiting to be perceived; that they are, in their own way, as brute as gasses and rocks. There would be no reason to think that these brute values are always nicely knit together in the mutually accommodating way that hedgehogs imagine. On the contrary, it would seem more plausible that values conflict—as they certainly seem to do, for instance, when it would be an act of kindness to tell someone a lie or when the police can save some people from a terrible death only by torturing other people.

The contrary metaphysical opinion yields much the same result. We say: “It’s crazy to think that values are ‘out there’ waiting to be discovered. So there is nothing that can make a moral judgment true. We don’t find our values; we invent them. Values are just tastes and distastes gilded with honorifics.” Then it would seem even sillier to insist on some grand unity of our values. We can, and do, want a large variety of things, and we cannot have all of them at the same time, or indeed ever. If our values are only our desires glorified, why shouldn’t they reflect our undisciplined and contradictory greed?

On the other hand, if I am right that there are no nonevaluative, second-order, meta-ethical truths about value, then we cannot believe either that value judgments are true when they match special moral entities or that they cannot be true because there are no special entities for them to match. Value judgments are true, when they are true, not in virtue of any matching but in view of the substantive case that can be made for them. The moral realm is the realm of argument, not brute, raw fact. Then it is not implausible—on the contrary—to suppose that there are no conflicts but only mutual support in that realm. Or, what comes to the same thing, that any conflicts we find intractable show not disunity but a more fundamental unity of value that produces these conflicts as substantive results. Those are the conclusions I defend in Chapters 5 and 6.

How shall we classify the independence thesis? In what philosophical pigeonhole does it rest? Is it a kind of moral realism? Or constructivism? Or even anti-realism? Is it itself a nonmoral metaphysical theory? Or a quietist or minimalist theory that just ignores rather than really escapes troublesome metaphysics? None of these labels fits exactly—or exactly doesn’t fit—because each is stained with the mistaken assumption that there are important philosophical questions about value that are not to be answered with value judgments. Please forget the pigeonholes as you read this book.

Responsibility

If, as I claim, a successful theory of justice is moral all the way down, then any sharp disagreement about justice is likely to survive all the way down as well. There is no neutral scientific or metaphysical plane on which we can stand finally to adjudicate which of different views about equal concern or liberty or democracy or any other opinion about right or wrong or good or bad is the best or true one. That means that we must pay considerable attention to another important moral virtue: moral responsibility. Though we cannot expect agreement from our fellow citizens, we can nevertheless demand responsibility from them. We must, therefore, develop a theory of responsibility that has sufficient force so that we can say to people, “I disagree with you, but I recognize the integrity of your argument. I recognize your moral responsibility.” Or, “I agree with you, but you have not been responsible in forming your opinion. You’ve thrown a coin or believed what you’ve heard on a biased television network. It’s only an accident that you’ve arrived at the truth.”

We might call a theory of moral responsibility by a grander name: we might call it a moral epistemology. We cannot be, in any causal way, “in touch” with moral truth. But we can nevertheless think well or badly about moral issues. What is good and bad thinking is itself a moral question, of course: a moral epistemology is part of substantive moral theory. We use part of our overall theory of value to check our reasoning in other parts. So we must be careful to keep that part of our theory sufficiently distinct from other parts to allow it to function as a check on the rest. I have already anticipated my main claim about moral reasoning in this advance summary: I argue, in Chapter 6, that moral reasoning must be interpretive.

Our moral judgments are interpretations of basic moral concepts, and we test those interpretations by placing them in a larger framework of value to see whether they fit with and are supported by what we take to be the best conceptions of other concepts. We generalize, that is, the interpretive approach I described. We must take that approach to all our moral and political concepts. Morality as a whole, and not just political morality, is an interpretive enterprise. At the end of Chapter 8 I offer, as a classical and paradigm illustration of the interpretive approach, the moral, political, and ethical philosophies of Plato and of Aristotle.

In Chapter 10 I turn to an ancient threat that offers to make everything in my account of responsibility pointless: the apparently catastrophic idea that we can have no responsibility at all because we lack free will. I argue for what philosophers call a “compatibilist” view: that responsibility is compatible with any assumption we can sensibly entertain about what causes our various decisions and what the neural consequences are of those decisions. I argue that the character and extent of our responsibility for our actions turns rather on an ethical question: What is the character of a life well lived? I emphasize here and throughout the book the distinction between ethics, which is the study of how to live well, and morality, which is the study of how we must treat other people.

Ethics

How, then, should we live? In Part Three I argue that we each have a sovereign ethical responsibility to make something of value of our own lives, as a painter makes something valuable of his canvas. I rely on the authority of Part One, about truth in value, to argue that ethical responsibility is objective. We want to live well because we recognize that we should live well, rather than the other way around. In Part Four I argue that our various responsibilities and obligations to others flow from that personal responsibility for our own lives. But only in some special roles and circumstances—principally in politics—do these responsibilities to others include any requirement of impartiality between them and ourselves.

We must treat the making of our lives as a challenge, one we can perform well or badly. We must recognize, as cardinal among our private interests, an ambition to make our lives good lives: authentic and worthy rather than mean or degrading. In particular we must cherish our dignity. The concept of dignity has become debased by flabby overuse in political rhetoric: every politician pays lip service to the idea, and almost every covenant of human rights gives it pride of place. But we need the idea, and the cognate idea of self-respect, if we are to make much sense of our situation and our ambitions. Each of us bursts with love of life and fear of death: we are alone among animals conscious of that apparently absurd situation. The only value we can find in living in the foothills of death, as we do, is adverbial value. We must find the value of living—the meaning of life—in living well, just as we find value in loving or painting or writing or singing or diving well. There is no other enduring value or meaning in our lives, but that is value and meaning enough. In fact it’s wonderful.

Dignity and self-respect—whatever these turn out to mean—are indispensable conditions of living well. We find evidence for that claim in how most people want to live: to hold their heads high as they struggle for all the other things they want. We find more evidence in the otherwise mysterious phenomenology of shame and insult. We must explore dignity’s dimensions. At the outset of this summary I described two fundamental principles of politics: a requirement that government treat those it governs with equal concern, and a further requirement that it respect, as we may now put it, its subjects’ ethical responsibilities. In Chapter 9 I construct the ethical analogues of these two political principles. People must take their own lives seriously: they must accept that it is objectively important how they live. People must take their ethical responsibility seriously as well: they must insist on the right—and exercise that right—to make ethical decisions finally for themselves. Each of these principles needs much elaboration. I offer part of what is needed in Chapter 9, but the application of the two principles in later chapters, as well as the discussion of determinism and free will I mentioned, furnish much more detail.

Morality

Philosophers ask: Why be moral? Some take this question as strategic. How can we tempt wholly amoral people to mend their ways? The question is more profitably understood in a very different way: as asking how we can account for the appeal of morality that we already feel. That is a profitable question because answering it not only improves self-understanding but helps to refine the content of morality. It helps us to see more clearly what, if we are to be moral, we must do.

If we can connect morality to the ethics of dignity in the way I propose, we will have an effective answer to the philosophers’ question understood that way. We can then reply that we are drawn to morality in the way we are drawn to other dimensions of self-respect. I use many of the ideas already mentioned in this summary to make a case for that reply: particularly the character of interpretation and of interpretive truth and the independence of both ethical and moral truth from science and metaphysics. But I rely mainly on Immanuel Kant’s thesis that we cannot adequately respect our own humanity unless we respect humanity in others. Chapter 11 sets out the abstract basis for that interpretive integration of ethics and morality, and considers objections to the feasibility of that project. Chapters 12, 13, and 14 take up a series of central moral issues. When must someone who properly values his own dignity aid others? Why must he not harm them? How and why does he incur special responsibilities to some of them through deliberate acts like promising and also through relationships with them that are often involuntary? We encounter old philosophical questions pursuing these various topics. How should numbers count in our decisions about whom we should aid? What responsibility do we have for unintended harm? When may we cause harm to some people in order to aid others? Why do promises create obligations? Do we have obligations just in virtue of our membership in political, ethnic, linguistic, and other communities?

Politics

Part Four ends with that transition to Part Five, and the book ends where I began this summary: in a theory of justice. My argument draws that theory from what has gone before. I hope, by presenting my argument backward in this introductory chapter, to emphasize the interdependence of the book’s several themes. Chapter 15 argues that much political philosophy suffers from a failure to treat the main political concepts as interpretive, and the remaining chapters try to correct that mistake. I defend the conceptions of these concepts I summarized earlier and claim for them the kind of truth only a successful integration can claim. The last chapter is epilogue: it repeats the
claim, now through the lens of dignity, that value has truth and that value is
indivisible.

A Just So Story

I do not ask you to take the following conjectures seriously as intellectual history; they are not subtle or detailed or—I’m sure—correct enough for that. But whatever defects my account may have as history, it might help you to understand better the argument I just summarized by seeing how I conceive its place in a large historical story. At the end, in the Epilogue, I tell the same story more briefly and differently—and add a challenge.

The ancient moral philosophers were philosophers of self-affirmation. Plato and Aristotle saw the human situation in the terms I identified: we have lives to live and we should want to live those lives well. Ethics, they said, commands us to seek “happiness”; they meant not episodic glows of pleasure but the fulfillment of a successful life conceived as a whole. Morality also has its commands: these are captured in a set of virtues that include the virtue of justice. Both the nature of happiness and the content of these virtues are initially indistinct: if we mean to obey the commands of both ethics and morality, we must discover what happiness really is and what the virtues really demand. This requires an interpretive project. We must identify conceptions of happiness and of the familiar virtues that fit well together, so that the best understanding of morality flows from and helps define the best understanding of ethics.

The god-intoxicated philosophers of the early Christian period and of the Middle Ages had the same goal, but they had been given—or so they thought—an obvious formula for achieving it. Living well means living in God’s grace, which in turn means following the moral law God laid down as the law of nature. That formula has the happy consequence of fusing two conceptually distinct issues: how people have come to hold their ethical and moral beliefs, and why those ethical and moral beliefs are correct. God’s power explains the genesis of conviction: we believe what we do because God has revealed it to us directly or through the powers of reason he created in us. God’s goodness also justifies the content of conviction: if God is the author of our moral sense, then of course our moral sense is accurate. The fact of our belief is in itself proof of our belief: what the Bible and God’s priests say must therefore be true. The formula did not make for entirely smooth sailing. The Christian philosophers were troubled, above all, by what they called the problem of evil. If God is all-powerful and the very measure of goodness, why is there so much suffering and injustice in the world? But they found no reason to doubt that such puzzles were to be solved within the template provided by
their theology. The morality of self-affirmation was firmly in control.

The philosophical explosions of the late Enlightenment ended that morality’s long reign. The most influential philosophers insisted on a firm epistemological code. We can endorse our beliefs as true, they insisted, only if the best explanation of why we hold those beliefs vouches for their truth, and it can do that only if it shows those beliefs to be either the product of irresistible reason, like mathematics, or the effect of the impact of the natural world on our brains like the empirical discoveries of the nascent but already stunning natural sciences. That new epistemological regime posed an immediate problem for convictions about value, a problem that has challenged philosophy since. We are not entitled to think our moral convictions true unless we find these convictions either required by pure reason or produced by something “out there” in the world. Thus was born the Gibraltar of all mental blocks: that something other than value must underwrite value if we are to take value seriously.

The Christian and other religious philosophers could respect part of the new epistemological code because they did find something “out there” that underwrote conviction. But they could do so only by violating the naturalistic condition. Philosophers who accepted that further condition found the code more challenging. If the best explanation of why we think theft or murder wrong is to be found not in God’s beneficent will but in some natural disposition of human beings to sympathize with one another’s suffering, for instance, or in the convenience to us of the conventional arrangements of property and security that we have contrived, then the best explanation of these beliefs contributes nothing to their justification. On the contrary: the disconnection between the cause of our ethical and moral beliefs and any justification of those beliefs is in itself grounds for suspicion that these beliefs are not actually true, or at least that we have no reason to think them true.

The great Scottish philosopher David Hume is widely understood to have declared that no amount of empirical discovery about the state of the world—no revelations about the course of history or the ultimate nature of matter or the truth about human nature—can establish any conclusions about what ought to be without a further premise or assumption about what ought to be.⑥ Hume’s principle (as I shall call that general claim) is often taken to have a stark skeptical consequence, because it suggests that we cannot discover, through the only modes of knowledge available to us, whether any of our ethical or moral convictions is true. In fact, I argue in Part One, his principle has the opposite consequence. It undermines philosophical skepticism, because the proposition that it is not true that genocide is wrong is itself a moral proposition, and, if Hume’s principle is sound, that proposition cannot be established by any discoveries of logic or facts about the basic structure of the universe. Hume’s principle, properly understood, supports not skepticism about moral truth but rather the independence of morality as a separate department of knowledge with its own standards of inquiry and justification. It requires us to reject the Enlightenment’s epistemological code for the moral domain.

The ancient and medieval conception of self-interest, which takes self-interest to be an ethical ideal, was another casualty of the new supposed sophistication. Disenchantment and then psychology produced a progressively bleaker picture of self-interest: from Hobbes’s materialism to Bentham’s pleasure and pain to Freud’s unreason to the economists’ homo economicus, a being whose interests are exhausted by his preference curves. Self-interest on this view can only mean the satisfaction of a mass of contingent desires that people happen to have. This new, supposedly more realistic, picture of what it is to live well produced two Western philosophical traditions. The first, which came to dominate substantive moral philosophy in Britain and America in the nineteenth century, accepted the new, meaner view of self-interest and therefore declared that morality and self-interest are rivals. Morality, this tradition insisted, means a subordination of self-interest; it requires taking up a distinct objective perspective that counts the agent’s own interests as in no way more important than anyone else’s. That is the morality of self-abnegation, a morality that spawned the moral philosophy of impersonal consequentialism, of which the theories of Jeremy Bentham, John Stuart Mill, and Henry Sidgwick are famous examples.

The second tradition, much more popular on the continent of Europe, rebelled against the bleak modern picture of self-interest, which it regarded as base. It emphasized the underlying freedom of human beings to struggle against custom and biology in search of a more ennobling picture of what a human life could be, the freedom that we grasp once we understand, as Jean-Paul Sartre put it, the distinction between objects in the world of nature, including ourselves so conceived, and the self-conscious creatures that we also are. Our existence precedes our essence because we are responsible for the latter: we are responsible for making our nature and then for living authentically up to what we have made. Friedrich Nietzsche, who has become the most influential figure in this tradition, accepted that the morality recognized by the conventions of Western community requires the subordination of the self. But he insisted that morality therefore stands exposed as a fake with no claims on us. The only real imperative of life is living—the creation and affirmation of a human life as a singular and wonderful creative act. Morality is a subversive idea invented by those who lack the imagination or the will to live creatively.

The first of these two modern traditions, the morality of self-abnegation, lost interest in self-interest, which it treated as the satisfaction of the desires people happened to have. The second, the ethics of self-assertion, sometimes lost interest in morality, which it treated as mere convention with no objective value or importance. The Greek idea of an interpretive unity between the two departments of value—a morality of self-affirmation—has survived only in a very degraded form. In the seventeenth century, Thomas Hobbes argued that conventional morality promotes everyone’s self-interest, understood in the new, non-normative, desire-satisfaction way, and his contemporary followers have used the techniques of game theory to refine and defend the same claim. His suggestion unites morality with ethics, but to the discredit of both. It takes the desire view of ethics as fundamental, and it takes morality’s function as only to serve desire. The Greek ideal was very different: it assumed that living well is more than having your desires satisfied and that being moral means taking a genuine, not just an instrumental, concern in the lives of others. Modern moral philosophy seems to have abandoned that ideal of ethical and moral integrity.

I have so far left Kant out of my Just So story, but his part is complex and crucial. His moral philosophy seems the paradigm of self-abnegation. The truly moral person, in his view, is moved only by the moral law, only by laws or maxims he could rationally will to apply to everyone equally. No act is morally good that is motivated only by the agent’s interests or inclinations, even his altruistic inclinations of sympathy or desire to help others. There seems no space in this account for the idea that an agent’s moral impulse can flow from his ambition to make something distinguished of his own life, to do a good job of living. Yet we can understand Kant to make exactly that claim: it is, on the best understanding, the foundation of his entire moral theory.

He claimed, in one stage of his evolving theory, that freedom is an essential condition of dignity—indeed, that freedom is dignity—and that only through legislating a moral law and acting out of obedience to that law can an agent find genuine freedom. So what seems a morality of self-abnegation becomes, at a deeper level, a morality of self-affirmation. Kant’s unification of ethics and morality is obscure because it takes place in the dark: in what he called the noumenal world, whose content is inaccessible to us but which is the only realm where ontological freedom can be achieved. We can rescue Kant’s crucial insight from his metaphysics: we can state it as what I shall call Kant’s principle. A person can achieve the dignity and self-respect that are indispensable to a successful life only if he shows respect for humanity itself in all its forms. That is a template for a unification of ethics and morality. Just as Hume’s principle is the anthem of Part One of this book, which describes the independence of morality from science and metaphysics, Kant’s principle is the anthem of Parts Three and Four, which chart the interdependence of morality and ethics. In between lies Part Two, about interpretation, and after lies Part Five, about politics and justice.

===============================================================================
p.425

① Isaiah Berlin, The Hedgehog and the Fox: An Essay on Tolstoy’s View of History (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1953), 3.

② Much of the fox’s ammunition relies on substantive moral pluralism: the thesis that sound moral principles and ideals inevitably conflict with one another. See Berlin, The Crooked Timber of Humanity: Chapters in the History of Ideas, ed. Henry Hardy (London: John Murray, 1991); Thomas Nagel, “The Fragmentation of Value,” in Mortal Questions (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979).

③ See John Rawls, Political Liberalism (New York: Columbia University Press, 1996).

④ I first described and defended this thesis long ago. See “Objectivity and Truth: You’d Better Believe It,” Philosophy & Public Affairs 25 (Spring 1996): 87–139. I have been lecturing about that and other issues in this book off and on since then, and am boundlessly grateful to many commentators and critics over those years.

⑤ See Crispin Wright, Truth and Objectivity (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1992); and Kit Fine, “The Question of Realism,” Philosopher’s Imprint 1, no. 2 (June 2001), www.philosophersimprint.org/001001/.

⑥ In book 3 of his Treatise Hume said, “In every system of morality … the author proceeds for some time in the ordinary way of reasoning, and establishes the being of a God, or makes observations concerning human affairs; when of a sudden I am surpriz’d to find, that instead of the usual copulations of propositions, is and is not, I meet with no proposition that is not connected with an ought, or ought not … [no reason is given] for what seems altogether inconceivable, how this new relation can be a deduction from others, which are entirely different from it” (L. A. Selb-Bigge edition, 469). The interpretation set out in the text has been accepted by many philosophers, including Richard Hare (The Language of Morals [Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952], 29, 44), who encapsulated it in what he called “Hume’s Law.” But it has also been challenged; for example, by Alistair MacIntyre, who argued that, in ruling out a “deduction” from fact to norm, Hume did not rule out other modes of inference (MacIntyre, “Hume on Is and Ought,” Philosophical Review 68 [1959]) and who noted that Hume himself seemed often to pass from psychological reports to moral claims. It makes no difference to my argument whether my description and use of Hume’s principle is a misinterpretation of his argument or whether he violated that principle himself. But, as we shall see in Chapter 3, Hume’s principle, at least as I have formulated it, is far from uncontroversial.

===============================================================================

Key concepts:

agreement/disagreement (in morality) (7): value agreement/disagreement
anti-realists (9, 10)
Bentham (17)
Christian (16)
colonial philosophy (9), philosophical colonialism (10)
compatibility (12)
democracy (5): each citizen participates as an equal partner
 he has an equal voice and an equal stake in the result
dignity (13, 419)
 two principles of (420): responsibility and being positive
distributive justice (2, 3), resource equality
economist (17)
equality (2):
 two reigning principles of a legitimate government
 equal concern for fate
 full respect for personal/ethical responsibility
ethical responsibility is objective (13)
ethics: the study of how to live well (13)
 concern and responsibility
free will
Freud (17)
Hobbes (17, 18)
Hume (17)
impersonal consequentialism (18)
independence (10)
integration (5): unity of values
 integration is a necessary condition of truth
intellectual responsibility about value is itself an important value
interpretation:
 depends on values
 we share moral concepts because we share social practices and experiences in which these concepts figure
 we take the concepts to describe values
 we disagree because we interpret the practices we share rather differently
 moral reasoning must be interpretive
interpretive concepts (6), depending on values/descriping values
justice: equality, liberty, democracy, law
Kant (19)
law (5): a branch of morality
liberty: that part of your freedom that government would do wrong to constrain
living well vs. having a good life (419)
meta-ethical (10)
metaphysical independence of value (9):
 The only intelligible case for the “mind-independence” of some moral judgment is a moral argument showing that it would still be true even if no one thought it was
 independence of value: all arguments of/about morality are themselves moral judgements
 the moral realm is the realm of argument
 independence from science and metaphysics
Mill (18)
moral judgments: interpretations of basic moral concepts (12)
moral objectivity (8)
the moral realm is the realm of argument, not brute, raw fact (11)
moral responsibility/moral epistemology (12)
morality: the study of how we must treat other people
morons (9)
naturalism: scientific and causal, without the help of God
Nietzsche (18)
objective: the recognition of what we should do
parameters vs. limitations (421)
Plato and Aristotle (15)
procedural justice (5)
realists (9, 10, 67)
Sartre (18)
self-abnegation (18)
self-affirmation (15)
self-assertion (18)
self-interest (17)
self-respect (13)
Sidgwick (18)
subjectivism (9)
theory of interpreation: value-based
truth, character of
 an interpretive concept (418)
unity of value (7): the truth about living well and being good and what is wonderful is not only coherent but mutually supporting
value: value judgments can be true (417); has truth and is indivisible
Value judgments are true, when they are true, in view of the substantive case that can be made for them (11)

We must find the value of living in living well

Hume’s principle (17): no amount of empirical discovery about the state of the world can establish any conclusions about what ought to be without a further premise or assumption about what ought to be; independence of morality/values

Kant’s principle (19): a person can achieve the dignity and self-respect that are indispensable to a successful life only if he shows respect for humanity itself in all its forms; interdependence/unification of morality and ethics

moral pluralism: the thesis that sound moral principles and ideals inevitably conflict with one another

===============================================================================

Questions:

Will there be truths if man ceases to exist? What if man evolves into a more intelligent species?

Do moral truths exist independent from the existence of man?
-value judgments/arguments
-from the designer of the universe
-truths had been there long before the coming of man
-the innate capability of man to interact with truths

Are values human products? Related to intelligence?