3 External Skepticism (40)

An Important Claim

In Chapter 1 I said that moral skepticism is itself a moral position. That is an important claim that has been and will be severely challenged. If it is true, then external skepticism defeats itself. An external error skeptic holds that all moral judgments are objectively false, and an external status skeptic that moral judgments do not even purport to be true. Each contradicts himself if his own skeptical judgment is itself a moral judgment; surely he must claim truth for his own philosophical position. So the philosophical leverage of my claim is very great, both in general and for the further arguments of this part of the book. Even most philosophers who insist that moral judgments can be true or false will disagree with that claim.➀ I must therefore take some care in explaining and defending it.

You might think it Pickwickean to insist that a philosophical statement that denies the existence of moral properties itself makes a moral claim. You might offer these analogies: the observation that astrology is bunk is not itself an astrological claim, and atheism is not a religious stance. That depends, however, on how we choose to define these categories. If we define an astrological judgment as one that asserts or presupposes some planetary influence on human lives, then the proposition that astrology is bunk, which denies any such influence, is not an astrological judgment. However, if we define an astrological judgment as one that describes the character and extent of planetary influence, then the statement that there is no such influence is indeed an astrological judgment. If we define a religious position as one that presupposes the existence of one or more divine beings, then atheism is not a religious position. But if we define it as one that offers an opinion about the existence or properties of divine beings, then atheism certainly is a religious position.

Cosmology is a domain of thought: it is a part of science more broadly understood. We can ask: What is true and false in that domain? What is true or false, that is, cosmologically speaking? Skepticism about astrology and God stake out answers to that question: they speak to the issue of what there is among the forces of our universe. We could hardly say, “Since we are atheists, we insist that nothing is true, cosmologically speaking.” We have offered, in our atheism, an opinion about what is true in that domain. Morality is also a domain. Its topics, we might say, include these questions: Do people have any categorical responsibilities to other people—responsibilities, that is, that do not depend on what they want or think? If so, what categorical responsibilities do they have? Someone takes a position on these issues when he declares that the rich have a duty to help the poor. Someone else takes a contrary position when he denies that the rich have any such obligation because, he says, the poor have brought their poverty on themselves. A third person takes a broader form of that second position if he declares that no one ever has a moral obligation because moral obligations could be created only by a god and there is no god. A fourth person argues that no one ever has a moral obligation because there are no queer entities that could constitute a moral obligation. The latter two skeptics offer different kinds of reasons, but the state of affairs each claims to hold is the same. The content of the two claims—what the different skeptics claim to be the case, morally speaking—is the same. Both of them, not just the third, make a moral claim and so cannot consistently declare that no moral claim is true. Compare: we may say that no claim anyone makes about the shape or color of unicorns is true because there are no unicorns. But we can’t then declare that no proposition of unicorn zoology can be true.

As I said in Chapter 1, moral philosophers have characteristically insisted on a fundamental distinction between moral judgments and philosophical judgments about moral judgments. Russ Shafer-Landau claims that the distinction is evident in other fields. “We are not doing mathematics when we ask about the ontology of numbers. We can stand apart from theological disputes and still query the basic assumptions of religious doctrine.”➁ But many philosophers of mathematics do think we are doing mathematics when we declare that numbers exist.➂ And we certainly do not stand apart from religious dispute when we insist that there is no god. On the contrary, we stand at the center of that dispute. The distinction that philosophers like Shafer-Landau have in mind is at best semantic. Consider: “Victims of automobile accidents cannot recover compensation unless someone has been negligent” and “Tort law enforces the no-liability-without-fault doctrine.” The second statement is in a sense about statements like the first, but it is nevertheless itself a legal judgment. We can treat skeptical moral theories as theories about more detailed moral judgments in the same way, but they are nevertheless moral judgments as well. Shafer-Landau adds, “We can leave our grammar books aside and still ask about whether grammatical facility is innate.” Yes, because the latter question is biological, not grammatical. No view of biology disagrees with any opinion about correct grammar. But there is nothing else for moral skepticism to be but moral.

Some philosophers have found what they take to be a mistake in my argument: I suffer from a mental block, they believe, about the possibilities of negation.➃ An external skeptic, on their view, declares that acts are neither morally required nor forbidden nor permitted. Surely that does not stake out a moral position but instead refuses to make any moral claim at all. So I am wrong, they say, to suppose that external skepticism is itself a moral position. Consider this conversation:

A: Abortion is morally wicked: we always in all circumstances have a categorical reason—a reason that does not depend on what anyone wants or thinks—to prevent and condemn it.

B: On the contrary. In some circumstances abortion is morally required. Single teenage mothers with no resources have a categorical reason to abort.

C: You are both wrong. Abortion is never either morally required or morally forbidden. No one has a categorical reason either way. It is always permissible and never mandatory, like cutting your fingernails.

D: You are all three wrong. Abortion is never either morally forbidden or morally required or morally permissible.

A, B, and C make moral claims. Does D? Because it is unclear what he could mean by his mysterious claim, we ask him to elaborate.

He might say, first, “Any proposition that assumes the existence of something that does not exist is false. Or (as I sometimes think) neither true nor false. A, B, and C are all assuming that moral duties exist. But no such thing exists, so none of them is making a true statement.” D has fallen victim to morons—or rather the lack of them. If there are morons, and morons make moral claims true or false, then we might imagine that morons, like quarks, have colors. An act is forbidden only if there are red morons in the neighborhood, required only if there are green ones, and permissible only if there are yellow ones. So D declares that, because there are no morons at all, abortion is neither forbidden, nor required, nor permissible. His assumption that there are no morons, he insists, is not itself a moral claim. It is a claim of physics or metaphysics. But he has seriously misunderstood the conversational situation. A, B, and C have each made a claim about what reasons of a certain kind—categorical reasons—people do or do not have. D’s claim that no duties exist means that no one ever has a reason of that kind. So perforce he expresses a moral position; he agrees with C and cannot say, without contradiction, that what C says is false (or neither true nor false).

D might say: “A, B, and C are each relying on the existence of morons to sustain their claim.” But they are doing no such thing. Even if A thinks there are morons, he would not cite their existence and color as arguments in his favor. He has very different kinds of arguments: that abortion insults the dignity of human life, for instance. But once again, to be generous to D, let us assume that A, B, and C are unusual and would cite morons as arguments. That doesn’t help D’s case. What matters is not the arguments that the trio make but what they take to be the conclusion of those arguments. To repeat: each makes a claim about the categorical reasons people do or do not have with respect to abortion. The upshot of D’s various arguments, whatever they are, is a claim of the same kind. He thinks there are no such reasons and therefore disagrees with A and B and agrees with C. He makes a much more general claim than C does, but his claim includes C’s. He has taken a position on a moral issue: he has taken a substantive, first-order, moral stance.

Now D corrects himself. “I should not have said that the claims of A, B, and C are false, or that they are neither true nor false. I should have said that they make no sense at all: I cannot understand what they could mean by claiming or denying categorical reasons. It’s all gibberish to me.” People often say that some proposition makes no sense when they mean only that it is silly or obviously wrong. If that is what D now means, he has not changed his approach; he has just added emphasis. What else might he mean? He might mean that he believes the others contradict themselves, claiming something impossible, as if they claimed to see a square circle on a park bench. That changes his argument but not his conclusion. If he thinks that categorical reasons are impossible, then once again he thinks that no one has a categorical reason for anything. He still takes a moral stand. One more try. Perhaps he means that he finds what the others say literally incomprehensible. He concedes that they seem to have a concept he lacks; he can’t translate what they say into a language he understands. Of course that is preposterous: he knows very well what A, B, and C mean to say about people’s moral responsibilities. But if he insists that he doesn’t understand, he ceases to be a skeptic of any kind. I can’t be a skeptic in a language I can’t understand.

The message of all this seems clear. When you make a statement about what moral responsibilities people have, you are declaring how things stand—morally speaking. There is no way out of or around the independence of value. Now, however, suppose that D replies in a very different way. “I mean that the arguments on both sides of the abortion issue are so evenly balanced that there is no right answer to the question whether abortion is forbidden or required or permissible. Any such claim assumes that the arguments for its position are stronger than those for the other, and that is false.” In Chapter 5 I emphasize the difference between being uncertain about the right answer to some question and believing that there is no right answer—that the issue is indeterminate. D, in this new elaboration, has indeterminacy in mind: that is why he says that all the other positions are false, not just unpersuasive. His position is now obviously a substantive moral claim. He does disagree, finally, with C as well as A and B, but he disagrees with them all because he holds a fourth moral opinion. He assesses the strength of the three moral opinions and finds none of them stronger than either of the others. That is a form of skepticism, but it is internal skepticism.

Hume’s Principle (44)

If, as I argue, any moral skepticism is itself a substantive moral claim, then external moral skepticism contradicts itself in the way I said. It also violates the principle of moral epistemology I called Hume’s principle. This holds that no series of propositions about how the world is, as a matter of scientific or metaphysical fact, can provide a successful case on its own—without some value judgment hidden in the interstices—for any conclusion about what ought to be the case. Hume’s principle seems to me obviously true. Consider this attempt to violate it. “Jack is in great pain and you could easily help him. Therefore, just for that reason, you have a moral duty to help him.” If this is a good argument, just as it stands, then some principle about what makes an argument a good one must be at work. What is that principle? It cannot be any form of induction or generalization, because these would assume that you have had a moral duty in the past, which is a moral assumption. It cannot be a principle of deduction or semantic entailment. It needs something more, and that must be something—a hidden premise or an assumption about the nature of good moral reasoning—that is infused with moral force.

Yes, the fact that someone standing before you is evidently in great pain does seem by itself a reason why you ought to help him if you can. Nothing more needs to be said. But I assume you think this because you unselfconsciously accept, as something that goes without saying, a general responsibility to help people in grave need when you easily can. Suppose you make it explicit that you are not relying on any such background moral assumption. You declare that you have no view one way or the other about any general responsibility to help people in pain in circumstances just like these. You simply insist that in this particular case the pain before you, on its own, without any further assumption of that kind, imposes a moral responsibility on you. Your point then becomes not obvious but opaque.

Some philosophers have offered a different objection.➄ Hume’s principle, they agree, does show that a set of nonmoral facts cannot, on their own, establish a moral claim. But it doesn’t follow that nonmoral facts cannot, on their own, undermine a moral claim. So external skepticism, which seeks only to undermine, may succeed in spite of Hume’s principle. But this rescue fails if, as I claim, skepticism is itself a moral position. Undermining the moral claim that people have a duty not to cheat is the same as establishing the moral claim that it isn’t true that they have that duty. Hume’s principle has been challenged in other ways; I find these challenges all unsuccessful.➅

Of course, Hume’s principle does not outlaw the many disciplines—sociology, psychology, primatology, genetics, political science, and common sense—that study morality as a social and psychological phenomenon. Nor does it outlaw what I take to be at least part of Hume’s own project: the natural history of moral sentiment and conviction. We can learn a great deal about morality and ourselves by attending to facts about what is and has been. We can speculate about why certain moral convictions are popular in some cultures and communities though not in others, about the varied forms of influence and pressure that have proved effective in perpetuating these convictions as social norms, about when and how children become sensitive to moral claim and censure, about why certain moral opinions are near universal among human beings, and about how the economic circumstances of a community, among other factors, correlate with the content of moral convictions current there.

These are all important and fascinating questions, and they have of course been set out much more precisely than I have just done. I distinguish them all, however, from the question before us now, the question that is usually of much greater interest to most of us: Which moral opinions are true? Hume’s principle applies only to this latter question. This crucial distinction between moral judgments and descriptive studies about morality is sometimes obscured by an ambiguity in the idea of explanation. People ask: How can we explain morality? That might be understood as calling for the kind of factual explanation I just described. It might invite, for example, a neo-Darwinian account of the rise of certain practices among higher primates and early human beings. On the other hand it might call for a justification of moral practices and institutions. Justification is what someone has in mind who demands, in an angry tone, “Explain yourself!”

Error Skepticism (46)

If external skepticism is itself a moral position, then it contradicts itself. External error skepticism seems most immediately vulnerable because it holds that all moral claims are false. Error skeptics might revise their view, however, to hold only that all positive moral judgments are false. Positive moral judgments, they might say, are those that offer guidance for action or approval: these include judgments that some action is morally required or forbidden, that some situation or person is morally good or bad, that someone has a moral virtue or vice, and so forth. They might call the alternatives to such claims—that some situation is neither good nor bad but morally neutral, or that some person is to be neither praised nor criticized for some trait of his character—negative moral judgments. But, as I said earlier, these are still moral judgments. They are as much moral judgments as the proposition that the law neither requires nor forbids drinking wine is a legal judgment. Error skepticism so revised would therefore be an example of global internal skepticism. It would have the same content, for instance, as the theory that God is the only possible author of moral duty and that he does not exist. An error skeptic might hope to rely on some argument parallel to that one: that only queer entities can impose moral duties and that there are no queer entities. I consider that odd claim in the next chapter. Or he might rely on two other familiar arguments that I consider now. We must inspect these, however, as arguments for an internal, not an external, skepticism.

Diversity

John Mackie, the most prominent recent error skeptic, argued that positive moral claims must be false because people disagree about which of them are true.➆ His sociological assumptions are largely correct. Moral diversity is sometimes exaggerated: the degree of convergence over basic moral matters throughout history is both striking and predictable. But people do disagree about important matters, like affirmative action, abortion, and social justice, even within particular cultures. Does that show that we actually have no moral duties or responsibilities at all?

Of course it should give us pause that others disagree with what we find so plain. How can I be sure that I am right when others, who seem just as intelligent and sensitive, deny that I am? But we cannot take the fact of disagreement itself to count as an argument that our moral convictions are mistaken. We would not count the popularity of any of our other convictions as evidence for their truth. The fact that almost everyone thinks that lying is sometimes permissible doesn’t provide any reason at all for thinking that it is. Why then should we count disagreement about some opinion as evidence against its truth? Mackie and other skeptics have only one response to that sensible question. They take diversity to prove that moral conviction is not caused by moral truth. If it were, we would expect less disagreement. Suppose millions of people claimed to have seen unicorns but disagreed wildly about their color, size, and shape. We would discount their evidence. If there were unicorns, and people had seen them, the actual properties of the beast would have caused more uniform reports.

I argue, in the next chapter, that error skeptics are right to deny that moral truth causes moral conviction. People’s personal histories, rather than any encounters with moral truth, cause their convictions. If so, some combination of convergence and diversity is exactly what we should expect. People’s personal histories have a very great deal in common, starting with the human genome. Their situation, everywhere and always, is such that they are very likely to think that murder for private gain is wrong, for instance. But these histories also have a great deal not in common: the habitats, economies, and religions of people differ in ways that also make it predictable that they will disagree about morality too. In any case, because diversity is just a matter of anthropological fact, it cannot on its own show that all positive moral judgments are false. People, in their diversity, must still decide what is true, and this is a matter of the justification of conviction, not the best explanation of either convergence or divergence.

Morals and Motives

Mackie also said that positive moral judgments presuppose, as part of what they mean, an extraordinary claim: that when people come to hold a true positive moral opinion, they are just for that reason motivated to act in whatever way it commands. So if it is true that you ought not to cheat on your income tax, your coming to accept that truth must have the consequence that you feel drawn as by a magnet to report your income and deductions accurately. But that is, as Mackie put it, a “queer” consequence. In other domains, just accepting a fact doesn’t automatically carry any motivating force: even if I accept that there is poison in a glass in front of me, I might, in certain circumstances, feel no reluctance to drink it. If moral propositions are different in this striking way—if belief about a moral fact carries an automatic motivational charge—then this must be because moral entities have a special and unique kind of magnetic force. The idea of an “objective good,” Mackie said, is queer because it supposes that “objective good would be sought by anyone who was acquainted with it, not because of any contingent fact that this person, or every person, is so constituted that he desires this end, but just because the end has to-be-pursuedness somehow built into it. Similarly, if there were objective principles of right and wrong, any wrong (possible) course of action would have not-to-be-doneness somehow built into it.”➇

It is unclear how we should understand these supposedly lethal metaphors. We should certainly agree that there are no morons with automatic coercive moral force. But why should we think it follows that torture is not morally wrong? We might be driven to that conclusion if we held the theory of moral responsibility I just mentioned: that no positive moral opinion is justified unless that opinion has been produced by direct contact with some moral—and motivating—truth. We consider that theory, as I said, in the next chapter. In any case, however, it seems that Mackie misunderstood the connection that people think holds between morality and motivation. He thought that people suppose that true positive moral judgments move them to act as the judgment directs. If they did think that, then they would indeed be presupposing a strange kind of moral force. In fact, however, people who find some automatic connection between moral conviction and motivation think this connection holds for false as well as true convictions. They think that anyone who really believes that he is morally required not to walk under ladders will feel constrained not to walk under them. It is conviction, not truth, that supposedly carries the motivational surge. So it cannot be a matter of queer entities.

Morals and Reasons

There is another, now more fashionable, argument for external error skepticism. It begins by noticing a crucial assumption of the ordinary view: that the wrongness of an act gives people a categorical reason—a reason that does not depend on their own desires and preferences—to avoid it. I relied on that connection between morals and reasons just now in explaining why D, in the last invented discussion, really does disagree with A. A believes that people have a categorical reason not to countenance or assist abortion. D believes there are no categorical reasons, and therefore that what A says is false.

Some philosophers believe that D’s position follows just from what it is to have a reason.➈ There is an essential internal connection, they insist, between having a reason and having a desire. You can’t have a reason to do something unless you have a genuine desire (I mean a desire that you would have or retain even if you thought consistently and were well informed) that doing it would help to satisfy. So the idea of a categorical reason—a reason you have even if it matches no genuine desire—makes no sense at all. Because moral judgments assert or presuppose categorical reasons, they are all false.

On that view of what having a reason means, Stalin had no reason not to murder his colleagues. But should we accept that view? Bernard Williams argued for it by proposing this test: If someone has a reason to do something, that reason must be at least potentially capable of explaining how he behaves.➉ If I know that you want to help the starving poor, I can explain why you contributed to UNICEF by citing that desire. But if you don’t want to help the poor and so don’t contribute, I can’t say that you had a reason to help them, because attributing that reason to you couldn’t explain how you acted. Because Stalin had no desire to spare his former colleagues, we couldn’t explain any of his actions by attributing to him any reason to spare them. So, on Williams’s view, we must concede that he had no reason not to murder them.

But nothing requires us to adopt Williams’s test, so nothing requires us to accept that people only have the reasons that serve their desires. We might adopt an alternative view: we might say that someone has a reason to murder his colleagues if (but only if) doing that would be good for him. Then it would not automatically follow that someone has a reason to murder whenever murder would suit his aims, because it might be that a career of murder would not in fact be good for him. This alternative view would not automatically support Williams’s test. But it would not automatically contradict that test either. The alternative view would make everything turn on a further, ethical issue. What, in general, is good for a person? Even if we accepted the alternative view, we might nevertheless insist that the only thing that is good for a person is to have his genuine desires satisfied. We would then accept something like Williams’s view of what it is to have a reason. But we might, on the contrary, think that it is good for a person to live with decency and self-respect, and that, whatever Stalin thought, his brutality was bad for him. The alternative view, that is, ties questions of rationality to questions of ethical theory.

How shall we decide which view of what it is to have a reason is correct—Williams’s view, which automatically ties reasons to desires, or the alternative view that does not? Should we treat this as only a question of linguistic usage, to be decided, that is, by identifying the correct or standard use of that phrase? But there is no correct or standard use. We do sometimes use the phrase in an instrumental sense that might seem to support Williams’s account. We say that because Stalin wanted to consolidate his power, he had a reason to murder potential rivals. But we also use it in the contrary way: it is hardly a linguistic mistake to say that people always have a reason to do the right thing. Shall we say, then, that the philosophical disagreement is only illusory? That because we can sensibly use the phrase “has a reason” in different senses, philosophers do not really disagree? That the choice can therefore have nothing to do with an important philosophical issue like error skepticism? But then why haven’t philosophers spotted their mistake long ago? Why does the debate still seem real and important to them?

If the debate is not illusory, and if it is not about standard usage, then what is it about? In Chapter 8 I describe a class of concepts—I call these “interpretive concepts”—that we share in spite of disagreeing about which understanding of the concept is best. We argue for one conception over others by constructing a theory to show why our favored conception best captures the value locked in the concept. Conceptual theories are of course controversial; this explains why different conceptions compete in both ordinary and philosophical usage. The concept of having a reason is an interpretive concept.⑪ We cannot usefully answer questions that turn on which conception is best, like the question whether Stalin had a reason not to purge his colleagues, by just declaring a definition one way or another and then drawing our answer from that definition. We must construct a larger structure of different kinds of value into which a conception of rationality fits—a structure that justifies a particular conception or understanding of what it is to have a reason.

That larger structure must answer the question, among others, why a person should care about what he has reason to do. But that is a normative question, not a psychological or motivational one; it asks not whether a person does care but whether he should care. A conception of rationality would be a poor one—it could serve no justifying purpose—if it declared that someone has a reason to get what he wants even if getting it would be bad for him. So an ethical theory—a theory about what is good or bad for people—must be part of a successful theory of reasons and rationality: the alternative conception I described, which ties rationality to ethics, is therefore a better conception. Later in this book, in Parts Three and Four, I argue for a particular ethics and then for an interpretive connection between ethics and morality. If I am right, then someone who lives as Stalin did has a bad life: his life is bad for him even if he does not recognize that it is. Williams had a different ethical theory. He thought that what is good or bad for people depends only on what they genuinely want. He was skeptical about any more-objective ethical or moral truth, and he therefore denied the possibility of categorical reasons. I believe, and will argue, that there are objective ethical truths and therefore that there are indeed categorical reasons. In any case, a philosopher cannot properly argue for external error skepticism by assuming that there are no categorical reasons. He must argue in the opposite direction: he can deny categorical reasons only if he has already and independently embraced an error skepticism about ethics.

Status Skepticism (52)

Two Versions

Status skepticism is popular, I said, because it does not ask us to pretend we are abandoning convictions that we cannot actually abandon. It encourages us to keep our convictions and give up only bad metaphysics. The long arguments between status skeptics and their opponents, and among status skeptics about which form of their view is most persuasive, now dominate what is called “meta-ethics” in academic philosophy. I will not try to describe or assess this literature here. I want to focus on a different question: Is status skepticism a distinct and available position at all?

It is available, even as a position to contest, only if we can establish a distinction between what the two following judgments mean or come to: first, that torture is always wrong, and second, that the wrongness of torture is a matter of objective truth that does not depend on anyone’s attitudes. If the second, supposedly philosophical, judgment is only a wordy restatement of the first concededly moral one, then no one can coherently embrace the first without the second and status skepticism is a bust from the start. It is hardly obvious that the necessary difference can be found between the two claims. It would certainly seem odd for someone first to insist that torture is wrong and then to declare that what he had just said is not true. It doesn’t help to insist, as many status skeptics do, that the first-order judgment that torture is wrong is only the projection of an attitude and not really a judgment at all. If it is, then why isn’t status skepticism just the projection of the opposite attitude and not a philosophical position at all?

That is the challenge status skeptics face. I believe the challenge fatal to all forms of that view. But status skeptics have tried to meet the challenge in at least two—contrary—ways. (1) Some take the challenge at face value. They insist that there is indeed a sufficient difference established in linguistic practice between the two speech acts—embracing a moral conviction and describing that conviction as true—so that there is no contradiction, logical or emotional, in performing the first of these speech acts while condemning the second. The first act is an engaged, first-order projection of emotion. The second is a mistaken, second-order philosophical judgment. (2) Other status skeptics concede that there is no such difference between the two speech acts as these occur in ordinary discourse; they agree that in ordinary speech someone would contradict himself if he declared that torture is always wrong but then added that what he had just said is not really true. But they insist on a difference between two enterprises or language games: ordinary speech and philosophical speech. The status skeptic, according to this second defense, occupies himself in the language game of philosophical speech, and within that game he is privileged to say that the moral judgments people rightly call true in ordinary speech are not true in philosophical speech. So in ordinary life a status skeptic may declare with undiminished enthusiasm that torture is wrong and that its wrongness is a matter of objective moral truth. Then in philosophical speech he may consistently declare that both those opinions are only projections of emotion on a morally inert universe. The speech-act version of external skepticism was long popular: it dominated moral philosophy for decades. It grew steadily harder to defend, however, and the two-language-games version is in fashion now. We should consider the two strategies in turn.

Speech-Act Skeptics: The Challenge

I am speaking at length about abortion. I begin: “Abortion is morally wrong.” Then, drawing breath, I add a variety of other claims set out in the rest of this paragraph. “What I just said about abortion was not just venting my emotions or describing or expressing or projecting my own or anyone else’s attitudes or my own or anyone else’s commitment to rules or plans. My claims about the immorality of abortion are really, objectively, true. They describe what morality, quite apart from anyone’s impulses and emotions, really demands. They would still be true, that is, even if no one but me thought them true—indeed, even if I didn’t think them true. They are universal and they are absolute. They are part of the fabric of the universe, resting, as they do, on timeless, universal truths about what is fundamentally and intrinsically right or wrong. They are reports, that is, of how things really are out there in an independent moral reality. They describe, in short, real moral facts.”

Call all the statements I made after drawing breath my “further claims.” These further claims declare mind-independent moral truth in what seems an increasingly emphatic way. So there must be some red flag buried within them to draw a speech-act skeptic’s attention; there must be something in them he wants to deny. But my further claims also appear themselves to be moral claims. If so, and he denies them, he makes a moral claim as well. If he says that my claims are just projections of my emotions, he has tarred his own brush: his own philosophical claims become only emotional outbursts as well.

He must find some way to understand my further claims as stating or presupposing some factual or metaphysical thesis so he can deny that thesis without self-destruction. But that seems difficult, because the most natural way to understand my further claims is precisely as moral claims—albeit particularly heated ones. Someone who thinks that abortion is always and deeply wrong might well say, in an enthusiastic moment, “It is a fundamental moral truth that abortion is always wrong.” That would be only an emphatic restatement of his substantive position. Some of the other further claims do seem to add something to the original claim, but only by substituting more precise first-order moral judgments for it. People who use the adverbs “objectively” and “really” in a moral context usually mean to clarify their opinions in a particular way—to distinguish the opinions so qualified from other opinions that they regard as “subjective” or just a matter of taste, like a distaste for soccer or mustard. The claim that abortion is objectively wrong seems equivalent in ordinary discourse to another of my further claims: that abortion would still be wrong even if no one thought it was. That further claim, read most naturally, is just another way of emphasizing the content of the original moral claim, of emphasizing, once again, that I mean that abortion is just plain wrong, not wrong only if or because people think it is.

Another of my further claims, that abortion is universally wrong, can also be understood as only a clarification of my original moral claim. It clarifies its scope by making plain that in my view abortion is wrong for everyone, no matter in what circumstance or culture or of what disposition or from what ethical or religious background. That is different from saying simply that abortion is wrong or simply that it is objectively wrong. I might conceivably think that the wrongness of abortion is objective, since it depends on features of abortion and not the reactions of people to it, and yet that the wrongness of abortion is not universal because it is not wrong in certain kinds of communities: those whose religious life supports an entirely different conception of the sacredness of human life, perhaps. When someone says that the wrongness of abortion is universal as well as objective, it is natural to understand him as ruling out qualifications of that sort.

What about my further claim that the wrongness of abortion is absolute? It is most naturally translated to mean not just that abortion is always wrong in principle but that its wrongness is never overridden by competing considerations—that it is never true, for example, that abortion is the lesser of two evils when a mother’s life is threatened. What about the baroque claims I added toward the end, about moral truths being “out there” in an independent “realm” or forming part of the “fabric” of the universe? These are not things people actually say; they are invented by skeptics in order to have something to ridicule. But we can make sufficient sense of them, as things people might say, by understanding them as inflated, metaphorical ways of repeating what some of the earlier further claims say more directly: that the wrongness of abortion does not depend on anyone’s thinking it wrong. What about my very last phrase? I spoke of moral facts, but I am most naturally understood not as insisting that moral particles exist but yet again as emphasizing that I do not mean my comments to express only a subjective taste.⑫

None of these paraphrases helps the would-be external skeptic, because he contradicts his skepticism if he denies any of them. He can remain both external and a skeptic only if he can find something else in my further claims, something that is not itself a moral claim and yet whose denial has skeptical implications. I shall call these the twin conditions of semantic independence and skeptical pertinence. He would fail the latter condition, for instance, if he said that I am assuming, in my further claims, that people all agree about the immorality of abortion. I am certainly not assuming that; but even if I were, pointing out my mistake would have no skeptical implications. That people disagree about abortion is not, in itself, an argument against my thesis that abortion is in itself and always wrong. You may have begun to suspect that the two requirements I described, of independence and pertinence, cannot both be satisfied. Any skeptical thesis that is pertinent cannot be external.

I should, however, consider various possibilities. The philosophical literature makes one of these particularly important. A skeptic might purport to find, in my further claims, a psychological assumption—that I formed my views about abortion by apprehending their truth, that the best explanation of how I came to think abortion wrong is that I was “in touch” with the truth of the matter. The skeptic can then deny this—he can insist that so-called moral truth can make no impact on a human brain—and his denial is evidently not itself a moral claim. It meets the condition of independence. But it fails the pertinence condition: it carries no skeptical force. The issues it raises are complex, however, and I devote an entire chapter—the next one—to considering them.

What else might a speech-act skeptic find either explicit or buried in my further claims that he can deny so as to satisfy both conditions? I consider only three other possibilities because I believe these sufficient to reinforce my claim that he can find nothing. I try to ignore the details of particular schools and the arguments and refinements of particular writers, though I include notes about some of them.

Semantic Expressivism

First we must set aside semantic claims. Some status skeptics insist that when ordinary people declare that torture is morally wrong, they themselves intend only to express their own attitudes: they actually mean nothing more than to turn their thumbs down on the practice. That semantic story seems obviously wrong. What ordinary people mean when they say that torture is wrong is that torture is wrong. No restatement of what they mean can be as accurate. But these skeptical philosophers do not really doubt that: the semantics they invent are only the second act of their dramas. They first try to show that moral judgments make no sense if we take them at face value, that there is nothing for them to describe. Then they offer their new semantic theory to reinstate moral judgment as a sensible activity. If we reject the first act of the drama, we have no need of that next, reforming step. In any case, however, as I have already said, the arguments of this chapter cannot turn on these semantic issues. If a philosopher’s supposedly second-order philosophical judgment is actually a first-order moral judgment, and if we take first-order judgments to be only spleen-venting occasions, then we must take the same view of the philosopher’s own activities. We need to concentrate only on the drama’s first act.

Morals and Motives Again

Some speech-act skeptics insist that the close connection between moral judgments and motives I mentioned earlier shows that moral judgments cannot be beliefs, and so cannot be true or false, because beliefs cannot provide motives by themselves. I may believe that aspirin will relieve my pain, but it doesn’t follow that I am in any way inclined to take aspirin. I will feel that urge only if I have an independent desire that my pain cease. So if moral judgments do provide motives by themselves, they cannot be beliefs. We need a second act in which we declare them just emotional outbursts or declarations of some desire or plan; it is the emotion or desire or plan that supplies the near-automatic motivation we find.

This simple-sounding argument hides a great variety of complexities, refinements, and definitions.⑬ Its first step declares that moral beliefs necessarily motivate. It is quite unclear, at least to me, whether this claim is meant to be empirical, semantic, or conceptual. Much of the debate turns, for instance, on whether there are any “amoralists”—people in full mental health who claim to hold a moral conviction but who have no inclination to act in the way it directs. Is this a question of whether people with a certain personality in fact exist, and in what numbers? Or whether it would be a mistake to say of such a person that he really believes the conviction he endorses but ignores? If the latter, would that be a conceptual mistake, because being motivated is part of what it means to have a moral belief? Or semantic because our best linguistic rules for attributing moral beliefs to people rule this out? If you are tempted to ponder these issues, bear in mind Richard of Gloucester, who, descanting on his own deformity, declared, “I am determined to prove a villain” and counted his own plans “subtle, false and treacherous.”⑭ He wasn’t vowing just to do what others think villainous but to do what was, in his own view, villainous.

The argument’s crucial second step assumes another postulate also named after Hume, the eponymous father of so much doctrine. If moral convictions do automatically carry at least some weak motivational charge, then these convictions cannot express beliefs but can only testify to desires. This seems only dogma captured in an antique psychology. We often take behavior into account in deciding what beliefs people hold. Someone professes a fervent belief in an all-powerful and good god but does not reflect that conviction, even in the most marginal ways, in how he lives. Or declares all superstition rot but takes great trouble not to walk under a ladder or in a path crossed by a black cat. We are likely to say in either case that he does not believe what he says he does. But not that supposed beliefs about a god or magic are not really beliefs, that no one really believes in a god or rejects superstition.

Here is another popular argument supposed to show that moral judgments cannot express belief.⑮ Beliefs and desires, it is said, differ in their direction of fit with the world: beliefs aim to fit the world, and desires aim that the world fit them. Moral judgments aim at the latter direction of fit, so they cannot express beliefs. This seems simply to beg the question: if moral judgments express beliefs, and do not aim to fit the world, then not all beliefs aim to fit the world. In any case, moral judgments do aim to fit the facts—the facts about morality. If a skeptic adjusts the distinction to say that beliefs aim to fit how things are physically or mentally, then the circularity of his argument is even more evident. So the debate about morality and motivation has gone, yet again, in the wrong direction. A skeptic can provide an argument that moral judgments do not express beliefs only by first demonstrating that there is nothing for them to be beliefs about.

Whatever natural connection we find between people’s convictions about their moral duties and their behavior is much better explained by exploring a psychological question: Why do people take an interest in moral issues? If, as I believe, people want to live well and sense that living well includes respecting their moral responsibilities, then it is wholly natural that they mainly feel at least some impulse to do what they think they ought to do. That is not true of everyone. Some perverse people—Richard and Milton’s Satan, for instance—want to know what is wrong because they take special or additional pleasure in doing what is wrong—doing, as Satan put it, what he should “abhor.”⑯ But it is hard to see why anyone would take any interest in moral issues at all unless he thought that his opinions should in some way and to some degree affect what he does next. The true amoralist, if he exists, would not have any moral convictions at all.

Notice now, moreover, that the two-step argument I first described, which aims to show that moral judgments are not beliefs, cannot in any case help a status skeptic out of his difficulty. If my initial claim about abortion is not the expression of a belief, because it normally supplies a motive, then none of my further claims express beliefs either because they normally supply motives as well. It would be bizarre for someone to claim that abortion is absolutely, objectively, furniture-of-the-universe wrong and then cheerfully to counsel it to his friends. And if none of my further claims describes a belief, then how can any of them be false? And if none of them can, then what philosophical mistake does the speech-act skeptic offer to correct? What can he be skeptical about?

Primary and Secondary Qualities

He might now claim to find a different philosophical assumption in my further claims. Philosophers distinguish between primary qualities, which things have in themselves and would still have if there were no sentient or intelligent creatures, such as the chemical properties of metals, and secondary properties, which things have in virtue of their capacity to provoke particular sensations or reactions in sentient or intelligent creatures. The disgustingness of rotten eggs, for example, is a secondary property: it consists only in the eggs’ capacity to provoke a sensation of disgust in most or normal people. A status skeptic might take my further claims to declare that moral properties are primary properties. That reading would indeed provide a thesis for him to reject that is independent of my initial claim. Just as someone can deny that disgustingness is a primary property of rotten eggs and still believe that rotten eggs are disgusting, so a skeptic might deny that moral wrongness is a primary property of abortion and still believe that abortion is evil. But this strategy achieves independence from my initial claim not by endorsing an external, nonmoral thesis but by embracing a different first-order moral claim. It fails the independence condition in that different way.

The thesis that moral wrongness is a secondary property is a first-order substantive moral judgment. Suppose social scientists discovered that, contrary to what you and I think, contemplating torture does not in fact outrage even most normal people. You would still think that torture is wicked, I assume, but someone who believed that moral properties are secondary properties, so that the wrongness of torture could only consist in its disposition to outrage most normal people, would then disagree with you about that substantive moral issue. Even if all normal people do think that torture is wicked, the dispositional account of its wickedness is not neutral about morality, because it claims not just that most or normal people do react to torture in a particular way but that the wickedness of torture just consists in that reaction, and that further claim yields conditional or counterfactual statements that are both substantive and controversial. Which conditional or counterfactual claims follow from the dispositional thesis depends on the precise form the thesis takes; it depends, in particular, on how far and in which way the extension of moral properties is supposed to be fixed by our own natural history.⑰ That does not mean that moral properties are primary. But it does mean that the argument over whether they are is a substantive moral dispute.

Different Language Games? (59)

Richard Rorty

Here is the state of play. I said that a status skeptic must find a way to reject the thesis he opposes, which is that moral judgments are candidates for objective truth, without also rejecting the first-order, substantive moral declarations he wishes to leave standing. I described two strategies he might use. He might claim, first, that what he rejects—one or all of my further claims—are second-order, philosophical claims that differ in meaning, because they are different kinds of speech act, from the first-order substantive judgments he does not mean to reject. That is the strategy we have so far been reviewing.

We turn to the second strategy. A status skeptic might embrace rather than reject my further claims. He might count them all as only repetitions or variations of my initial claim about abortion and raise no objection to any of them. His skepticism, he might say, is confined to a different universe of discourse; confined, in the phrase Wittgenstein made famous, to a different language game altogether. He might explain the structure of his argument by pressing an analogy to the way we sometimes talk about fictional characters. I declare, playing the world-of-fiction game, that Lady Macbeth was married at least once before she married Macbeth.⑱ I do not contradict myself when I take up the different real-world game and say that there never was a Lady Macbeth, that Shakespeare just made her up. There is no contradiction between my two claims because I offer them in two different modes or universes of discourse. So a status skeptic might propose that we play a morality game in which we properly declare that torture is always and objectively wrong and also a different, reality game in which we can say that there is no such thing as wrongness.

Richard Rorty pioneered this response as a defense of status skepticism not just about moral and other value judgments but about propositions more generally. Here is a characteristic statement of his view:

  Given that it pays to talk about mountains, as it certainly does, one of the obvious truths about mountains is that they were here before we talked about them. If you do not believe that, you probably do not know how to play the usual language-games which employ the word “mountain.” But the utility of those language games has nothing to do with the question of whether Reality as It Is In Itself, apart from the way it is handy for human beings to describe it, has mountains in it.⑲

Rorty imagined two language games, each with its own rules. The first is the geology game in which you and I mostly engage. In that game mountains exist, existed before there were people, will exist after there are people, and would have existed even if there had never been people. If you don’t agree, you don’t know how to play the geology game. In addition, however, there is a second, Archimedean, philosophical game in which a different question can be raised: not whether mountains exist, but whether Reality as It Is In Itself contains mountains. In that second game, according to Rorty, a dispute has broken out between misguided metaphysicians who say that It Does and pragmatists like him who say that It Doesn’t, that mountains exist only in the ordinary geology game that people mostly play. Rorty’s strategy fails unless there is an actual difference in what people mean when they say, in the ordinary way, that mountains really exist and then say, with a philosophical air, that they don’t. We have no difficulty in understanding that we are playing a special kind of game when we talk about fictional characters, because we can collapse the two discourses into one by rephrasing any statement about Lady Macbeth to make plain what we really mean. I can say, for instance: “If we were to think (or pretend) that Shakespeare was describing real historical events, then we should think (or pretend) that Lady Macbeth had children by another man before she married Macbeth.” I could then add, now with no even surface contradiction, that of course Shakespeare invented those events and speeches. Rorty’s two-games metaphor can be redeemed only if we can dissolve the apparent contradiction about mountains in a parallel way: by offering a way to understand one or the other of the apparently contradictory claims that dissolves the conflict. But we cannot do that. Rorty’s distinction between the proposition about mountains that belongs to the geology game and the one that belongs to the Reality game fails to identify any difference in meaning between the two propositions. He hoped to display a difference through capitalization: the second proposition sports capital letters that the first lacks. But that device is not helpful. If we give the sentence “Mountains are part of Reality as It Is In Itself” the meaning it would have if anyone actually said this, then it means nothing different from “Mountains exist, and would exist even if there were no people,” and the contrast Rorty needs disappears. If, on the other hand, we assign some novel or special sense to that sentence—if we say, for example, that it means that mountains are a logically necessary feature of the universe—then his argument loses any critical force or philosophical bite because no one would or could think that mountains are logically necessary. That is in fact the same dilemma we explored in our discussion of speech-act skepticism. If the language-game skeptic satisfies the independence condition I described there, by showing that my further claims are not just repetitions of my initial claim, he fails the pertinence condition because his argument no longer has any force against the ordinary view.

Expressivists and Quasi-Realists

Rorty tried to distinguish ordinary judgments from the supposedly different philosophical claims he rejected, like my further claims, by placing them in different language games. We can construct another version of the two-language-games strategy for defending status skepticism, however, that places both ordinary moral judgments and my further claims in the same language game by identifying them all as first-order substantive moral opinion and then finding another kind of world—a distinct philosophical world—for a status skeptic to bustle in.

This version of the two-games strategy has an evident advantage: it allows an avowed status skeptic nevertheless to embrace at least the more natural, or perhaps all, of my further claims. He can agree that cruelty really is wrong, that it would still be wrong even if no one thought it was, and that these propositions are evidently true. He can say all this because he locates all these statements, and perhaps even my more extravagant further claims, as just more moves in the ordinary, day-to-day business of offering moral opinions. However, on a second look, and just for that reason, the strategy is self-defeating because it leaves no room for a status skeptic’s skepticism to spread itself.

Suppose a self-described “projectivist,” playing a philosophy game, declares that in reality moral convictions must be understood as emotional projections onto a morally inert world. But later, playing the morality game, he declares that the wrongness of torture has nothing to do with projecting attitudes of disapproval; torture, he says, would be wrong no matter what attitudes or emotions anyone had about it. Later still, now back in his philosophical game, he declares his last statement itself to be only the projection of an attitude. He treats all of my further claims in the same way. When in the morality game, he says that moral truths are timeless and stitched into the fabric of reality, and then, back in the philosophy game again, he reports his last statement to be a particularly florid projection.

Now the projectivist is in the difficulty I described for Rorty. He must show how his statements made in the morality game are consistent with those he makes in the philosophy game. He can do this, as we do in the world-of-fiction game, only by replacing his statement in either game with a translation that dissolves the apparent contradiction. But he cannot do that. He can’t replace what he says in the morality game with any statement, while still in that game, that implies or allows that wrongness is only a matter of projection. He can’t replace his statement in the philosophy game by declaring or implying there that wrongness does not depend on projection. His strategy swallows itself like the Cheshire cat leaving only a smile behind. (Michael Smith holds a contrary view.⑳)

Have any actual philosophers employed this self-defeating version of the two-game strategy? I said, in Chapter 2, that the skepticism of the prominent philosophers Allan Gibbard and Simon Blackburn, who call themselves “expressivists” and “quasi-realists,” is open to doubt. I do regard both as skeptical of the ordinary view. But both have denied this and suggested that their own views are much more like my own than I allow.㉑ So I should put my claim more cautiously: if they can properly be regarded as skeptical, it is this second, two-games strategy they use to defend that skepticism.㉒ The exegetical issue is not of direct importance, however; my aims in this book do not include defending particular interpretations of the work of other contemporary philosophers.

Constructivism (63)

We have not yet considered a very popular, supposedly meta-ethical theory that has often been counted as skeptical. This is called “constructivism.” It was made much more popular in recent decades by John Rawls, who described his famous book, A Theory of Justice, as an exercise in “Kantian” constructivism. On this view, moral judgments are constructed, not discovered: they issue from an intellectual device adopted to confront practical, not theoretical, problems. Rawls gave the example of Kant’s Categorical Imperative: Kant said that we must construct our moral judgments by asking what moral principles we could will as maxims to be followed not just by us but by everyone.

However, the most famous example among moral and political philosophers now is Rawls’s own original-position device. Rawls suggested that we fix principles of justice for the basic structure of our political community by imagining people who come together to establish such a community and who are well aware of general economic, technological, psychological, and sociological facts but ignorant of their own ages, genders, talents, social and economic positions, interests, desires, and ethical beliefs about how to live well. Rawls argued that people in that odd situation would agree on two principles of justice: one that assigns priority to certain liberties, and another that requires an economic structure in which the situation of the economically worst-off group is as good as a basic structure can make it. He said that you and I, here and now, therefore have reason to treat these two principles as defining justice for our own political community.

But why? Two strikingly different answers are possible. We might say, first, that the original position is an expository device for testing the implications of certain basic moral and political principles we take to be true. The original position, we might say, models those basic truths in its structure. I once proposed this understanding and suggested that the basic principles the device models are egalitarian. We believe that a coercive political community must treat everyone subject to its dominion with equal concern and respect; we can test what that requires, more concretely, by imagining a constitutional convention in which members have no ground for treating each other in any other way.㉓ Rawls firmly rejected my suggestion. “I think of justice as fairness,” he said, “as working up into idealized conceptions certain fundamental intuitive ideas such as those of the person as free and equal, of a well-ordered society, and of the public role of a conception of political justice, and as connecting these fundamental intuitive ideas with the even more fundamental and comprehensive intuitive idea of society as a fair system of cooperation over time from one generation to the next.”㉔ Rawls’s triple emphasis on intuition in this sentence suggests that though he disagreed with my suggested basic principles of justice, he agreed that the original position rested on assumed moral truths, albeit a different and more complex set than I had suggested. Elsewhere he isolated and stressed one idea in the set. “Put another way, first principles of justice must issue from a conception of the person through a suitable representation of that conception as illustrated by the procedures of construction in justice as fairness.”㉕ We might suppose that a particular conception of the person would fill this role because it is correct.

But these statements are also consistent with (or perhaps a step toward) a very different understanding that Rawls seemed to express on other occasions. I shall state this briskly, in a way that emphasizes the contrast I have in mind, ignoring nuance. People of good will in political community who disagree in their ethical and moral convictions face an immense practical problem. How are they to live together with self-respect in a coercive state? They cannot each insist that the state enforce his own private convictions: the state would then disintegrate, as Kant put it, into a political tower of Babel. Their solution: to collect together what is sufficiently common among them, by way of strictly political principle, and construct a political constitution that appeals only to such principles. Everyone in the community—or at least everyone who is reasonable—can accept that constitution as falling within an “overlapping consensus;” each can see these principles as supported by, or at least not condemned by, what he takes to be the truth about the broader ethical, religious, and personal moral convictions that divide them. Everyone can accept the basic structure of a society ordered by those common principles and so can form a political community that is “well-ordered” in the sense that each member accepts and serves the same principles of justice. The original position models the common convictions into a suitable device of representation that allows us to construct principles of justice like the two principles I described. You and I, here and now, must accept those principles provided we accept the ambition to live together in a peace and dignity.

It is this second way of understanding the original-position device that is offered as an example of a constructivist approach. Constructivism, understood through this example, is not necessarily skeptical. Indeed, it is consistent even with the most extravagant versions of moral “realism.” For it does not deny that one comprehensive view is true and all others false. However, it does not depend on that assumption. The principles modeled in the original position on this account are chosen not because they are true but because they are common. The method is therefore also consistent, on this understanding, with any form of skepticism about moral truth. Rawls seemed himself, at least on some occasions, to have accepted a fully skeptical view. “But in addition, the idea of approximating to moral truth has no place in a constructivist doctrine: the parties in the original position do not recognize any principles of justice as true or correct and so as antecedently given; their aim is simply to select the conception most rational for them, given their circumstances. This conception is not regarded as a workable approximation to the moral facts: there are no such moral facts to which the principles adopted could approximate.”㉖ So we might understand constructivism, at least as Rawls understood it, not as itself providing a skeptical argument but rather as showing that moral truth need play no part in defending an attractive and detailed theory of political justice. Constructivism challenges the ordinary view not directly but by trying to shove it aside.

Can this marginalization work? We must ask: How are these common principles, like a particular conception of the self, to be identified? As his ideas developed, Rawls placed greater emphasis on the history and political traditions of particular states. He aimed at finding shared principles within a particular historical community—the liberal, post-Enlightenment tradition in North America and Europe, for example—rather than to justify a more cosmopolitan constitution.㉗ He could not hope to do even this, however, through what we might call a sociological method. He could not hope to find a useful consensus even in what all Americans actually now believe or would accept on reflection. Religion would on its own defeat that project: a great many Americans believe that it is more important to establish a state reflecting and nourishing their personal religious convictions than to create one that people with a different religion, or none at all, could comfortably embrace. The difficulty becomes even more evident if we try to work in the other direction. What set of views about the character of free and equal persons could generate either of the two principles of justice and yet be adopted at a Tea Party convention?

Rawls plainly had in mind, however, not a sociological but an interpretive search for overlapping consensus. He hoped to identify conceptions and ideals that provide the best account and justification of the liberal traditions of law and political practice. That is an important and, in my view, feasible project.㉘ But it cannot be a morally neutral project, because any interpretation of a political tradition must choose among very different conceptions of what that tradition embodies—what qualities or properties it takes “free and equal” citizens to have, for instance—that all fit the raw data of history and practice. It must choose among these by taking some to be superior and hence to provide a more satisfactory justification than others.㉙ If you ask the present justices of the United States Supreme Court to describe the principles embedded in American constitutional history, you will receive nine different answers. The point is not that any interpretive account must be idealized. Of course it must. It is rather that without a background moral theory we take to be true we can have no idea which idealization to choose. A constructivist strategy can indeed be used to argue for a kind of skepticism—the thesis that any acceptable theory of justice must be drawn from a plausible interpretation of the traditions of the community for which it is designed, for instance. That would rule out any claim to a transcendental theory like utilitarianism that is supposed to hold everywhere and for all time. But this thesis would itself rest on controversial moral theories and so would be an example of internal, not external, skepticism. Rawls’s constructivist project, at least as he sometimes conceived it, is impossible.

Yes, Meta-Ethics Rests on a Mistake (67)

In Chapter 2 I described the distinction most moral philosophers draw between ordinary ethical or moral questions, which they call first-order substantive questions, and the second-order questions they call “meta-ethical.” Moral realism and external skepticism are all, on this view, meta-ethical positions. If I am right, however, the distinction is a mistake, at least as meta-ethics is traditionally conceived. Of course there are interesting questions of anthropology and of personal and social psychology that are second-order in the sense that they are about moral judgment but do not themselves call for moral judgment. But there are no distinctly philosophical questions of that kind; in particular the question whether moral judgments can be true or false is a substantive moral issue, not a distinct meta-ethical one. There is no meta-ethics unless (on the analogy I drew with astrology) we count the question whether there is meta-ethics as itself a meta-ethical question.

Some philosophers have identified what they call “quietism” as a meta-ethical position holding “that there is, in some sense, no way of getting outside of normative thought to explain it, and that therefore no answers to these questions [e.g., whether moral judgments can be true or false] are possible.”㉚ That would be the wrong conclusion to draw from this part of this book, and the wrong way to describe what it argues. It is true that we cannot justify a moral judgment (as distinct from explaining why someone believes that judgment) without relying on further moral convictions or assumptions. But that fact follows simply from the content of a moral judgment—what it claims—and the suggestion that we are therefore in some way trapped within the realms of value, as if it would be wonderful though impossible to escape, is as foolish as saying that we cannot escape from the realm of the descriptive when we describe the chemistry of combustion. That latter proposition might also have felt constraining—an unfortunate limitation—to an earlier age that reveled in the Great Chain of Being and found teleological explanations of natural phenomena particularly satisfactory. But it does not feel constraining to us. Nor is it right that no answer to the question whether moral judgments can be true or false is possible. On the contrary, our argument shows exactly the opposite: that answers are readily available to the question whether some particular moral judgments are true or false. The use of the term “quietism” is just more evidence that philosophers do not recognize the full independence of value.

External skepticism should disappear from the philosophical landscape. We should not regret its disappearance. We have enough to worry about without it. We want to live well and to behave decently; we want our communities to be fair and good and our laws to be wise and just. These are very difficult goals, in part because the issues at stake are complex and puzzling and in part because selfishness so often stands in the way. When we are told that whatever convictions we do struggle to reach cannot in any case be true or false, or objective, or part of what we know, or that they are just moves in a game of language, or just steam from the turbines of our emotions, or just experimental projects we should try on for size, to see how we get on, or just invitations to thoughts that we might find diverting or amusing or less boring than the ways we used to think, we should reply that these observations are all pointless distractions from the real challenges at hand. I do not mean that we can ignore moral skepticism. On the contrary. Genuine skepticism—internal skepticism—is much more worrying than these philosophical confusions. We will worry about it later.

===============================================================================
p.427

➀ See Aaron Garrett, “A Historian’s Comment on the Metaethics Panel at Justice for Hedgehogs: A Conference on Ronald Dworkin’s Forthcoming Book,” in Symposium: Justice for Hedgehogs: A Conference on Ronald Dworkin’s Forthcoming Book (special issue), Boston University Law Review 90, no. 2 (April 2010) (hereafter BU): 521.

➁ Russ Shafer-Landau, “The Possibility of Metaethics,” BU: 479.

➂ See, e.g., Penelope Maddy, Realism in Mathematics (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990).

➃ Michael Smith and Daniel Star suggest this mistake. Smith, “Dworkin on External Skepticism,” BU: 479; Star, “Moral Skepticism for Foxes,” BU: 497.

➄ See Shafer-Landau, “The Possibility of Metaethics,” and Star, “Moral Skepticism for Foxes.” Star assumes, in the course of his discussion of the point, that the thesis that ought implies can is not a moral principle. But it certainly seems to be. It contradicts some plainly moral positions, including a view some commentators attribute to Nietzsche—that it is a tragedy that though every human being ought to live greatly, only very few can manage it. Star says, however, that it does not follow from the fact that people may reject that principle on moral grounds in some circumstances that it is “always” a moral principle. But since it has the same meaning when denied as it has when asserted, how can this not follow? In any case, what else could “ought implies can” be but a moral principle? It is not a factual generalization. Or a natural law. It is not a logical or semantic principle. Does it belong to some as yet unnamed class of non-normative ideas?

➅ (1) One set of challenges relies on the idea of performative obligations I discuss in Chapter 14. Social practices are matters of fact, and certain social practices are taken to generate obligations. The institution of promising, for instance, declares that if someone promises, he has an obligation to keep his promise. Some institutions do not require even an act as voluntary as promising. Children have duties to their parents just in virtue of their biological or legal relationship. Should we say that in cases like these the social facts of convention generate moral responsibilities on their own? Some philosophers have argued that they do, and have cited this fact as a counterexample to Hume’s principle. (See Searle, “How to Derive ‘Ought’ from ‘Is,’ ” Philosophical Review 73 [1964]). For powerful criticism of this view, see James Thomson and Judith Thomson, “How Not to Derive ‘Ought’ from ‘Is,’ ” Philosophical Review 73 (1964). My own view is set out in Chapter 14. Such institutions do not create obligations from scratch: they assume more basic moral principles that give institutions moral forces.

(2) Some contemporary philosophers—“moral naturalists”—hold that moral properties are identical with natural properties and challenge Hume’s principle for that reason. They offer this analogy. We have discovered, through scientific inquiry, that the property of being water and the property of having the chemical structure H2O are the same property: anything that has that chemical structure is water. We might discover a parallel kind of identity in the case of moral concepts: we might discover, for instance, that the property of being condemned in the King James Version of the Bible is the same as the property of being morally wrong, or that the property of conducing to the general welfare is the same property as being morally right. If so, then demonstrating that an ordinary fact exists—that a practice is condemned in the King James Version or that an act will favor the general welfare—is enough, on its own, to demonstrate the truth of a moral claim.

This argument does not yet challenge Hume’s principle, however, because, though the proposition that water and H2O are identical is a scientific discovery, the claim that biblical condemnation is identical with being wrong, or that favoring welfare is identical with being right, is naturally understood as itself a moral claim. (See Railton, “Facts and Values,” in Facts, Values, and Norms: Essays toward a Morality of Consequence [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003], 43–68.) If so, then any argument that cites biblical condemnation or welfare consequences to support a moral position is an argument that includes a moral premise or assumption, as Hume’s principle says any such argument must. However, some moral naturalists argue that these identity claims are not moral claims but rather describe a special kind of ordinary fact: facts about concepts. (See Richard Boyd, “How to Be a Moral Realist,” in Geoffrey Sayre-McCord, ed., Essays on Moral Realism [Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1988].) They adopt the “causal” theory of meaning, developed in the arguments of Saul Kripke and Hilary Putnam (Kripke, “Naming and Necessity,” in Donald Davidson and Gilbert Harman, eds., Semantics of Natural Language [Dordrecht: Reidel, 1972]; and Putnam, “The Meaning of ‘Meaning,’ ” Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 7 [1975]).

On this theory, what a concept of a certain kind designates is fixed by historical facts about which natural kinds have attracted the concept’s designation. So “water” refers to the stuff, whatever it is, that has caused people to call it water. If we discover, through scientific study, that water necessarily has a certain molecular structure, then a substance on another planet that has all the surface properties of water is nevertheless not water if it does not have that molecular structure. Having that structure, or not, settles the question of whether a stuff is water. Moral naturalists hope to apply this theory of reference to moral concepts. Suppose we discover that a particular natural property of an action—the property, say, of favoring the general welfare—is the property that regulates what people call good or morally required, in much the same way as a molecular composition regulates what people call water. We can then say that the natural property of favoring the general welfare is identical to the moral property of being good or morally required, not because we accept a moral principle connecting welfare and rightness, but in virtue of a matter of ordinary linguistic fact. If this argument is successful, then Hume’s principle is indeed false. (See Railton, “Facts and Values.”)

But the argument seems mistaken in several ways. It makes assumptions about technical issues in semantics that seem unsustainable. (See Terence Horgan and Mark Timmons, “Troubles for New Wave Moral Semantics: The Open Question Argument Revived,” Philosophical Papers 21 [1992].) A different mistake is more important. The moral naturalist’s argument assumes that moral concepts belong to the family of concepts—these are often called “natural-kind” concepts—whose reference can sensibly be identified causally. In Chapter 8 I explain why this assumption is wrong. There is no one descriptive property, even a complex one, that has regulated the use of “wrong” as water has regulated the use of “water.” I argue in Chapter 8 that moral concepts belong to a different family of concepts—I call these interpretive concepts—whose meaning cannot be stated except through judgments of value. If this is correct, then no theory of the kind the moral naturalists offer, about the meaning of moral concepts, can challenge Hume’s principle, because any such theory embeds moral claims. That explains an inevitable reaction to the naturalist’s argument. It seems inconceivable that whether it is right to torture terrorist suspects or unjust not to provide universal health care depends on how people have used “wrong” or “unjust” in the past. When we understand that moral concepts are interpretive, not natural-kind concepts, we see why.

(3) Two other issues discussed later in this book can also be seen to put Hume’s principle at risk. (a) In Chapter 4 we consider the causal impact hypothesis, which states that people can interact causally with moral truth through some form of perception, and the causal dependence hypothesis that, if the causal impact hypothesis is false, it follows that no one can have any reason to hold any moral position. The latter principle is itself a moral principle—a piece of moral epistemology. The former is factual and, if it were true, would threaten Hume’s principle. I argue in Chapter 4 that both these hypotheses are false. (b) Later in this chapter, as part of a general survey of status skepticism, we take up a different philosophical claim: that because moral convictions are intrinsically motivating, they cannot be construed as beliefs that can be true or false. If that claim holds, and if it is just a matter of psychological fact whether moral convictions are intrinsically motivating, then this philosophical claim also challenges Hume’s principle. I reject the claim later in this chapter, however.

(4) Finally, the fact/value distinction is said itself to be illusory because factual claims are themselves impregnated with value (see, e.g., Hilary Putnam, The Collapse of the Fact/Value Dichotomy and Other Essays [Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002]). I believe that the claim of a “collapse” of fact into value is overstated. Very important distinctions between the two domains survive even once we recognize the important truth that assumptions of epistemic value—simplicity, coherence, intellectual elegance, and beauty—sometimes help to fix what we take to be scientific truth and cannot themselves be tested scientifically without question begging. See Chapter 4. I describe what I take to be the most important of these surviving and deep distinctions in Chapter 7. But even if we accepted the claim of collapse in its most extravagant form, and concluded that every statement of fact is a value judgment, Hume’s principle would not be threatened. On the contrary, it would become trivially true.

➆ John Mackie, Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong (New York: Penguin Books, 1977), 36–38.

➇ Ibid., 38–42, 40.

➈ See, e.g., Bernard Williams, “Internal and External Reasons,” in his collection Moral Luck (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981), 101–13: Richard Joyce, The Myth of Morality (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).

➉ Williams, “Internal and External Reasons,” 101–13.

⑪ Richard Joyce apparently has a contrary view. He treats the concept as what I call in Chapter 8 a criterial concept (see Joyce, The Myth of Morality, 102). That mistake, as I take it to be, has an important impact on his argument.

⑫ I should say, out of caution, that these nonmetaphysical, down-market translations of my further claims are not meant to endorse the “deflationary” theory of truth or, indeed, any other theory of truth. I consider such theories in Chapter 8.

⑬ See the online Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (plato.stanford.edu/) articles “Cognitivism and Non-Cognitivism,” “Judgment Internalism,” and “Moral Motivation” for some sense of the variety of theories on this subject in the field. See also Mark Van Roojen, “Moral Cognitivism vs. Non-Cognitivism,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, June 7, 2009, plato.stanford.edu/entries/moral-cognitivism/; and Connie Rosati, “Moral Motivation,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, October 19, 2006, plato.stanford.edu/entries/moral-motivation/.

⑭ Shakespeare, Richard III, act 1, scene 1.

⑮ See G. E. M. Anscombe, Intention, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1963), section 32.

⑯ Milton, Paradise Lost, book 4.

⑰ The simplest form of the view would be first-personal: torture is wrong if it disgusts me. That plainly entails a substantive judgment: torture would be acceptable if it didn’t disgust me. The most usual form of the view, I believe, is this: what makes an act morally wrong is that contemplating that act produces a particular kind of reaction in most people, or in most members of a particular community. It follows from that formulation that if one day people in general, or in the stipulated community, ceased to react in that way, torture would cease to be wicked, just as rotten eggs would cease to be disgusting if they no longer disgusted anyone. The thesis that torture would cease to be wicked if it were no longer so regarded is of course a highly controversial first-order moral position. However, the dispositional account might take different forms. It might hold, for example, that what makes torture wrong is the reaction, not of whichever kind of people happen to exist from time to time, but of us, that is, of people with the physiological structure, basic interests, and general mental dispositions that people actually have now. (See Crispin Wright, Truth and Objectivity [Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1992], 114.) In that case it would no longer follow that torture would cease being wicked if human beings developed very different general interests or neural wiring. But some plainly substantive and controversial claims would still follow: for instance, that torture would not have been wicked if economic or other circumstances had been different as human reactions evolved, so that creatures with our general interests and attitudes had not been revolted by it. The dispositional account might take other forms than these two; it might attempt to fix the extension of moral properties in other ways. But just as any philosophically illuminating account of the disgustingness of rotten eggs yields counterfactual claims about the circumstances in which rotten eggs would not be or have been disgusting, so any illuminating account of moral properties as secondary entails counterfactuals that state substantive moral positions.

⑱ Lady Macbeth: “I have given suck, and know / How tender ’tis to love the babe that milks me” (I, vii, ll.54–55). Macbeth had no children.

⑲ Richard Rorty, “Does Academic Freedom Have Philosophical Presuppositions?” in Louis Menand, ed., The Future of Academic Freedom (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996), 29–30.

⑳ Smith, “Dworkin on External Skepticism,” agrees that the speech-act version of status skepticism has “basically” been abandoned. He calls attention, however, to a version of the two-games strategy that he believes my arguments do not touch. “What distinguishes beliefs about moral matters of fact from beliefs about nonmoral matters of fact, external status skeptics now say, is that beliefs about moral matters of fact are entirely constituted by desires about non-moral matters of fact, while beliefs about non-moral matters of fact are not” (p. 518).

By way of background, consider the following argument. When we accept that some proposition is true, it remains a distinct and important philosophical issue what in the world makes it true—in what its truth consists or, as Kit Fine puts it, what “grounds” its truth (Kit Fine, “The Question of Realism,” Philosopher’s Imprint 1, no. 2 [June 2001], www.philosophersimprint.org/ 001001/). So though an external status skeptic might accept that “Cheating is wrong” is true, he might deny that its truth consists in the moral state of affairs of cheating being wrong. He might insist instead that its truth consists in some psychological state of affairs—of particular people having particular attitudes or desires. However, that would not help him out of the predicament I describe. He wants to be able to agree with anything substantive that a nonskeptic can say; he wants to be able to say, for instance, that the wrongness of cheating is a basic moral fact whose truth in no way depends on people’s attitudes. If he denied that very popular judgment, he would plainly be taking up a substantive moral position. His skepticism would be internal. So he wants to be able to deny that the wrongness of cheating consists in a psychological state when he is playing the game of substantive morality, but assert it, saying that true moral beliefs are indeed constituted by attitudes, when he plays a distinct, philosophical, second-level game. But, as I argue in the text, he cannot do that unless he can restate the propositions in one of the two games or the other so as to make them consistent. He cannot do that, so he must choose between the two propositions. He must finally decide whether the truth of cheating being wrong is constituted just by attitudes, in which case his skepticism is internal, or whether it is constituted by the wrongness of cheating, in which case he is not a skeptic at all.

Smith agrees that this argument fails, for this reason, to support an external skepticism. But he suggests that the argument for that position improves when we ask what a moral belief, rather than a moral fact, consists in. He cites a recent article to illustrate this strategy. James Drier considers the phenomenon described by the proposition “Julia believes that knowledge is intrinsically good.” He suggests that the difference between non-naturalism and naturalism “must, it seems to me, amount to the idea that the property of goodness enters into explanations of [such] phenomena that expressivists would explain by other means” (Drier, “Meta-Ethics and the Problem of Creeping Minimalism,” Philosophical Perspectives 18 (Ethics) [2004]: 41. I am not sure what kind of “explanation” Drier has in mind or how Smith thinks Drier’s suggestion bears on my argument. A “realist” need have no different opinion from an “expressivist” about Julia’s phenomenology or her brain states. Nor about the causal history of her belief. As I argue in Chapter 4, a “realist” can consistently adopt any personal-history causal explanation of anyone’s moral convictions that any kind of skeptic might offer. What kind of explanation does Drier then have in mind?

Perhaps he means to ask whether it is Julia’s desires or the moral facts she asserts that play the more basic or fundamental role in any metaphysical account of the situation. But however we understand this question (if we do), the crucial issue remains the same as when we focused, in the last paragraph, not on belief but on moral facts themselves. Does the “explanation” Drier has in mind include, at any stage or at any level or mode of metaphysical depth, a claim or assumption that knowledge is not intrinsically good? or not really or not intrinsically good? or something of the sort? If so, then once again the “expressivist” in question is not an external but an internal skeptic. Taking his whole account together, he advances a substantive view of the matter. His view may be metaphysical, but it also expresses a negative substantive conviction about goodness. But if not—if no opinion of that sort figures in or is entailed by his account of Julia’s belief—then he is not a skeptic at all. If this is “what external status skeptics now say,” they have not improved their position. (I do not suggest any doubt that there are important metaphysical issues that bear on the question whether the philosophical theories of realism and anti-realism about any domain can be distinguished and, if so, how. See, e.g., Fine, “The Question of Realism.” But only that these issue are orthogonal to the question I take up, which is the possibility of a genuine external skepticism.)

㉑ Gibbard suggests this in his recent book, Thinking How to Live (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2003), 183–88. Blackburn in conversation and correspondence.

㉒ Gibbard has consistently described his moral theory as “expressivist.” (He once called himself a “noncognitivist” as well, but he has now withdrawn that latter description [Allan Gibbard, Thinking How to Live, [183]). He explains his philosophical project this way: he means to “ask what states of mind ethical statements express” (183). He uses “ethical” to include “moral” and uses “express” in a sense closer to “means,” as in “boo” expresses disapproval, than to “signal,” as in “boo” expresses an inarticulate mind. His conclusion: moral judgments express acceptance of a plan for living. That sounds skeptical of the ordinary view, at least initially, because people who hold that view think that their moral judgments express beliefs that acts are right or wrong rather than the acceptance of plans. But Gibbard argues that an expressivist in his sense can sensibly say everything that ordinary people say about the truth and objectivity of moral judgment. He can explain the truth-claiming features of morality by describing them as internal to the plans accepted by people who make moral judgments. “Normative claims can be true or false, independent of our accepting them. To accept this is, roughly, to restrict your plans to ones that are not contingent on which plans, in the contingencies you plan for, you would accept if that contingency obtained” (6). That sounds like the two-game strategy I described: the expressivist offers a kind of explanation, at the level of explanation, that allows him to say everything a realist might say at the level of moral engagement. And, indeed, Gibbard distinguishes two games in much the way the strategy I describe requires: he distinguishes questions of the “internal adequacy” of his account, by which he means its success in mimicking the ordinary view, from questions about its “external adequacy,” by which he means its success as an explanation of the internal phenomena (184–88).

He is therefore right to confront my suggestion (published in an earlier article, “Objectivity and Truth: You’d Better Believe It,” Philosophy & Public Affairs 25 [Spring 1996]: 87–139, and repeated in the text) that if an expressivist fully succeeds in that mimicking project, he erases any difference between himself and those he takes to be his “realist” opponents. Gibbard calls this “a strange worry” (184). He insists that even if he and I fully agree about what makes sense at the internal, engaged level, we disagree at the philosophical level because his theory offers a better explanation of what happens at the engaged level. It better explains what state of mind moral judgments express. The ordinary view I defend cannot, he says, answer the question he takes as central to moral theory: Why does what we ought to do matter for what to do? (184). He presents his supposedly more successful answer in this dictum: “I say that the concept of ought just is the concept of what to do” (184, italics his). To have an opinion about what is right or wrong just is to have a plan, or part of a plan, about how to live.

However, I suggested that a two-games strategy collapses not because it proposes a different explanation for the same phenomena—that is what most theories do—but because it converts its supposed second-order explanation into part of the first-order phenomenon being explained. His dictum seems a good example. The question he says it answers—Why do what we ought to do?—is a first-order substantive ethical question that philosophers have been trying to answer since the beginning. (This book attempts an answer in its later parts.) We can understand Gibbard’s dictum, as an answer to that ancient question, in one of three ways. (1) We can take the dictum as a description of people’s state of mind when they express moral convictions. It then encounters two problems. First, it seems false. Some people very carefully plan to do what they think morally wrong, not out of weakness of will but out of straightforward and self-conscious perversity, just because it is wrong. I offered examples: Gloucester and Satan. Second, Gibbard’s dictum, understood as just description, does not respond to the question he says it answers. Any such description, even if accurate, would leave entirely open the substantive question: Why be moral? (2) We might treat the dictum as declaring a philosophical position: that there is a conceptual connection between thinking we ought to do something and planning to do it, so we cannot sensibly doubt that the thing to do is what one ought to do. Then it holds that Gloucester and Satan were talking nonsense—committing themselves to plans and rejecting those plans in the same breath. This is implausible. (3) Or we can understand the dictum as staking out a substantive position in the ancient debate. On this understanding, Gibbard makes the strong claim that “the thing to do” is never other than what morality allows. That states a first-order ethical conviction, not a second-order explanation.

Simon Blackburn’s views have apparently shifted over the years, but he seems at least once to have held a theory that exemplifies the two-games strategy described in the text. He insisted that moral judgments are best understood as projections of attitudes and emotions. (See, e.g., Simon Blackburn, “Reply: Rule-Following and Moral Realism,” in Andrew Fisher and Simon Kirchin, eds., Arguing about Metaethics [New York: Routledge, 2006], 471.) He called himself a “projectivist” and a “quasi-realist,” and he explained these self-descriptions in status-skeptical terms. He said he was improving on Ayer’s emotivism, for example. (See his autobiographical remarks at www.philosophynow.org/ issue35/35blackburn.htm.) He said, “I take an emotivist’s starting point: we see the meaning of moral utterances as essentially exhausted by their role in expressing the speaker’s attitude” (Essays in Quasi-Realism [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993], 19). He said he “holds that our nature as moralists is well explained by regarding us as reacting to a reality which contains nothing in the way of values, duties, right and so forth” (Arguing about Metaethics, 471.) But he was also at great pains, in many articles and books, to show that a projectivist like himself could “adopt the intellectual practices supposedly definitive of [moral] realism.” He insisted, for example, that a projectivist who agrees with Hume that values are a “new creation” produced by human response to a morally inert world can nevertheless say that the wrongness of cruelty does not depend on any human response to a morally inert world. He seemed to invoke the idea of two games or “businesses” to explain this apparent puzzle. “There is only one proper way to take the question ‘On what does the wrongness of wanton cruelty depend?’: as a moral question with an answer in which no mention of our actual responses properly figures … As soon as one uses a sentence whose simple assertion expresses an attitude, one is in the business of discussing or voicing ethical opinion.” But: “If one attempts to discuss external questions one must use a different approach—in my case, a naturalism that places the activities of ethics in the realm of adjusting, improving, weighing, and rejecting different sentiments or attitudes.” And: “The projectivist … has a perfect right to confine external questions of dependency to domains where real states of affairs, with their causal relations, are in question. The only things in this world are the attitudes of people … moral properties are not in this world at all, and it is only because of this that naturalism remains true” (“How to Be an Ethical AntiRealist,” in Blackburn’s Essays in Quasi-Realism [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993], 173–74).

I am assuming that Blackburn imagined a philosophical “business” distinct from moral “business,” so that a philosopher might be skeptical about the ordinary view in the former game but not in the latter. There is an alternate interpretation: that when he speaks of the “external” world of “naturalism” and of “real states of affairs,” he has in mind not a distinct philosophical world where he can deny the objective truth of moral judgment but rather the world of social scientists, sociologists, and psychologists whose business is to offer causal personal-history explanations of how people come to hold their moral convictions. On this second interpretation, his remarks about the absence of moral properties “in this world” mean only what is obviously true: that questions about the truth of moral convictions do not arise when we try to explain why someone holds the convictions he does.

I believe that the first of these two interpretations of the “external” world fits the body of Blackburn’s work better than the second does, however. Otherwise he wouldn’t say that “in my case” the business of explanation would mean naturalism: under the second interpretation, that would of course be true for everyone. Moreover the project of creating a projectivist “mimicking” of the ordinary view itself assumes skepticism about the ordinary view as it stands. Consider, for example, his argument why a projectivist can insist that it would still be wrong to kick dogs even if no one thought it wrong. A projectivist can say this, Blackburn says, because a projectivist “approves of a moral disposition” that, given the belief that no one minds kicking dogs, “yields the reaction of disapproval as an output; he does not approve of one which needs belief about our attitudes as an input in order to yield the same output, and this is all that gets expression in the counterfactual” (Blackburn, “RuleFollowing and Moral Realism,” in S. Holtzmann and C. Leich, eds., Wittgenstein: To Follow a Rule [London: Routledge, 1981], 179).

That is the language of status skepticism. Ordinary people who hold the ordinary view think, on the contrary, that what gets “expression” in the counterfactual is the belief that it would be wrong to kick dogs even if everyone thought otherwise.

㉓ Ronald Dworkin, Taking Rights Seriously (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1977), chapter 6.

㉔ See Rawls, “Justice as Fairness: Political not Metaphysical,” in Collected Papers, ed. Samuel Freeman (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999), 386, 400n19.

㉕ Rawls, “Kantian Constructivism in Moral Theory,” in Collected Papers, 303, 346.

㉖ Ibid., 350.

㉗ See Onora O’Neill, “Constructivism in Rawls and Kant,” in The Cambridge Companion to Rawls, ed. Samuel Freeman (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002), 347.

㉘ I defend and try to begin that kind of project in Is Democracy Possible Here? (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2006).

㉙ Christine Korsgaard believes that Rawls was given an “axiom” defining liberalism so that he had only to find a suitable procedure for satisfying that axiom (Korsgaard, “Realism and Constructivism in Twentieth Century Moral Philosophy,” in Philosophy in America at the Turn of the Century [Charlottesville, Va.: Philosophy Documentation Center, 2003], 99, 112). “Since liberalism claims that political policies are justified only when they are acceptable in the eyes of the citizens,” she says, “we must be able to offer reasons in support of these coercive policies that are acceptable to all the citizens.” If “acceptable” means “could be accepted,” the constraint is too weak: conversion is always possible. If it means “will be accepted,” it is too strong: there are no policies that will be accepted by everyone we count as reasonable in any state. Korsgaard says that her own version of constructivism begins in the idea that moral judgment has a practical function to play. Of course moral judgment, like any other activity, plays many functions. She means, I take it, that moral judgments are in some way exhausted by their practical problem-solving role. If they were, however, they would perform that role very badly. We do not first identify a practical problem we have, like needing to live together in peace, then find a practical solution to that problem, and then decorate our solution with moral confetti. We need moral concepts even to identify the problems we need to solve. We want to live with others not just in peace, which might be achieved by a variety of tyrannies, but in a just society whose institutions treat every citizen fairly by respecting their equal status. We want a society that is really just, not that we declare just because it is the upshot of a selection device we stipulate. So we cannot solve that problem without first deciding what justice requires. What “works” for us depends on the right understanding of moral concepts, not the other way around; we need some independent, nonconstructivist, way to decide what the right understanding is.

㉚ Nadeem Hussain and Nishi Shah, “Misunderstanding Metaethics,” in Oxford Studies in Meta-ethics, vol. 1, ed. Russ Shafer-Landau (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006), 268.

===============================================================================

Key concepts

Constructivism (63), Rawls: moral judgments are constructed, not discovered
 original-position device (63)
	principles of justice: priority to certain liberties, and basic economic structure
 Rawls: justice as fairness
	What is common, overlapping consensus
 views the ordinary view as irrelevant when constructing the system of moral judgments (65)
 choosing principles is a moral project
error skeptics: deny that moral truth causes moral conviction
 Because moral judgments assert or presuppose categorical reasons, they are all false (49)
 a philosopher cannot properly argue for external error skepticism by assuming that there are no categorical reasons (51)
indeterminacy (44)
Mackie (47)
 positive moral claims must be false because of diversity
 motivation of truths vs. motivation of convictions (49)
meta-ethics (67)
 moral realism and external skepticism are all meta-ethical positions (67)
negative moral judgments (46)
normative: should or should not
quietism (67)
reason, to have a (49)
Shafer-Landau (41)
skepticism: any moral skepticism is itself a substantive moral claim (44)
  skepticism is itself a moral position (45)
status skeptics:
 speech acts: embracing a moral conviction vs. describing the conviction as true (52)
 semantic independence: something in a moral proposition that is not moral/that is external (otherwise the denial itself will be a moral claim)
	skeptical pertinence: that nonmoral something has skeptical implications (55)
	Any skeptical thesis that is pertinent cannot be external
	1. Semantic Expressivism (56): blurring the two: no truth is involoved
	2. Motivation: beliefs do not have motivations, but moral judgments do, hence moral judgments are not beliefs
	 -moral beliefs necessarily motivate
	 -because of motivation, desire is implied
	 -there is no real difference between embracing vs. describing
	3. primary and secondary qualitites (58)
	 -any claim related to primary/secondary qualities is a substantive moral judgment
 language games: ordinary speech vs. Philosophical speech (53)
 Rorty (59)
	-no clear means to tell them apart without contradiction when the two games are mixed together
Williams (49)

moral skepticism is itself a moral position (40)
an external error skeptic holds that all moral judgments are objectively false
an external status skeptic that moral judgments do not even purport to be true

People’s personal histories, rather than any encounters with moral truth, cause their convictions.
diversity is just a matter of anthropological fact
People, in their diversity, must still decide what is true, and this is a matter of the justification of conviction
It is conviction, not truth, that supposedly carries the motivational surge
an ethical theory must be part of a successful theory of reasons and rationality

On morals and reasons: (49)
- no desires, no reasons
- categorical reasons are not associated with desires
- categorical reasons do not exist
- since there are no categorical reasons, there are no ethical truths
Having a reason is an interpretive concept

status skepticism (52):
- moral judgment: torture is always wrong
  - not description of facts
  - not a proposition and has no truth value
  - cannot be denied
- philosophical judgment: the wrongness of torture is a matter of objective truth
  - if not a proposition, then status skepticism is not stating anything
  - if a proposition, then what's the difference between the moral judgment and the philosophical judgment?
  - a philosophical judgment cannot be a moral judgment
  - there must be something nonmoral
  - that nonmoral part must be either true or false

speech acts (53):
- torture is always wrong: embracing a moral conviction, first-order projection of emotion
- the wrongness of torture is a matter of objective truth: second-order philosophical judgment
1. semantic independence: there must be something nonmoral in the second-order philosophical judgment that distinguishes it from the first-order projection of emotion
2. skeptical pertinence: whose denial has skeptical implications
A. The difference between a moral judgment and a philosophical judgment cannot be semanitic
B. cannot define beliefs in such a way to maintain moral judgments are not beliefs;  both the moral judgment and the philosophical judgment are beliefs
C. no use to introduce the distinction between primary and secondary qualities because judgments involving them are substantive moral claims

language games (59):
- different universe of discourse
- must offer a way to understand one or the other of the apparently contradictory claims that dissolves the conflict
- cannot turn all philosophical judgments into moral judgments
- there is no way to clearly indicate the switch of games