4 Morals and Causes (69)

Two Crucial Issues

What causes you to have the opinions you do about right and wrong? Where do these opinions come from? What produced in your brain the thought that the Iraq war was immoral? Or that it was not? Do the best answers to these questions validate your opinions? Or impeach them? Suppose I asked parallel questions about your scientific opinions. You might sensibly answer: the way the world is caused me to hold the opinions I do about the way it is. Our scientists form opinions about the chemistry of metals through a causal process in which the chemistry of metals itself plays an important part. It is because gold has the properties it does that experiments involving gold have the results they do. Because those experiments have those results, accredited scientists all believe that gold has those properties. You believe it has those properties because the accredited scientists do, and because they have in different ways told you so. The upshot of this causal chain is striking: the best explanation of why you hold most of your opinions is also a sufficient justification of those opinions. The explanatory story and the justifying stories are united: the best explanations of belief validate belief.

Is the same union of explanation and justification available for morality? Has the truth about the morality of gay marriage in some way caused you to think what you do about gay marriage? I suggested my own answer earlier when I ridiculed the idea of moral forces with causal powers as “morons.” But perhaps I am wrong; many distinguished philosophers do think that moral facts can cause people to hold true moral opinions, though they disagree about how and why. We must examine their view more carefully. Suppose, however, that I am right: there is no causal interaction between moral truth and moral opinion. Wouldn’t that make your opinions about gay marriage just an accident? Wouldn’t you have to admit that even if there are moral truths “out there” in the universe, you have no possible way to be “in touch with” those truths?

I have just mooted two hypotheses. The first is the causal impact hypothesis (CI). This holds that moral facts can cause people to form moral convictions that match those moral facts. Moral realists accept CI and external skeptics reject it. I argue that in this matter realists are wrong and external skeptics right. The second is the causal dependence hypothesis (CD). This supposes that unless the causal impact hypothesis is true, people can have no sound reason to think that any of their moral judgments is a correct report of moral truth. External skeptics embrace this second hypothesis. So, apparently, do many realists, because they would otherwise not be so anxious to defend the causal impact hypothesis. I argue that in this matter both realists and external skeptics are wrong. There is an obvious and important difference between the two hypotheses. CI includes a claim of scientific fact: a matter of particle physics, biology, and psychology. CD is a moral claim: about what counts as an adequate reason for holding a moral conviction.

The Causal Impact Hypothesis

The Stakes

Affirmative action programs give preference in university admissions or employment to black and other minority applicants. Suppose you think that such programs are unfair.➀ Why do you think this? That question is ambiguous. It might mean: What reasons could you offer in defense of your position? So understood, the question asks for a moral argument. Or it might mean: What is the best causal explanation of why you have come to hold that view, given that so many others in your political culture have come to the opposite conclusion? We should concentrate now on this second question. A psychologist or social scientist or biologist might respond to that question in a professional way. He might point to features of your subculture or upbringing or self-interest, or, if he is madly ambitious, he might try to identify a gene that predisposes you to that opinion. He assumes that some explanation of this sort is a complete answer to the question of why you hold the opinion you do.

You might be tempted to offer a different and competitive answer to the same question. You might say, “I have come to think affirmative action unfair because I, unlike those others, have seen or perceived or intuited that it is unfair.” Some philosophical realists believe that your answer is indeed competitive with any that the scientists might offer, that it makes sense, and, indeed, that it is often correct. They think that at least some people have a sensitivity to moral truth that allows them to perceive what is right or wrong, worthy or unworthy. They insist that when people have perceived moral truth, no explanation of the birth of their conviction is complete unless it includes that fact.➁

If that causal impact thesis makes sense, and is persuasive, then any global moral skepticism must be false. As I just said, people’s beliefs about the physical world are often caused directly or indirectly by the truth of what they believe, and when they are, that fact confirms the truth of their belief. The best explanation of why I believe that it rained earlier today includes the fact that it did rain. If realists can construct a successful explanation of why you believe that affirmative action is unfair along the same lines—if they can show that you believe this because affirmative action is wrong—then they would in that way justify your conviction as well as explain its existence. That would also show that, after all, Hume’s principle is false. It is a matter of biological fact whether something has caused your brain to be in any particular state. If it follows from some biological fact of that kind that affirmative action is wrong, then Hume’s principle must be scrapped.➂

However the causal impact hypothesis (CI) is a high-risk strategy for defending the ordinary view from skepticism. For it risks encouraging the further thought that if, on the contrary, moral facts cannot cause moral convictions, then we have no reason to think that there are any moral facts and therefore no ground on which to reject skepticism. Suppose that though you believe that it rained in France today, no rain in France could possibly figure in any explanation of why you believe that. Perhaps you were hypnotized into that belief by a hypnotist who had no knowledge of Gallic rain. You would then have no reason at all to think it had rained there. External skeptics argue that CI is false and that moral facts, even if there were any, could never play any role in explaining people’s moral convictions. They conclude that we have no more reason to believe in the truth of our moral convictions than you would have reason, in my latest story, to believe in the rain. That conclusion depends on rejecting the causal impact hypothesis. But it also depends on accepting the causal dependence hypothesis.

The Myth

We often realize that an act is wrong immediately we spot it. When I see someone beating a child, I “see” the wrongness of his act at once. However, that is not an instance of moral facts causing a moral conviction: I would not have “seen” the wrongness of beating the child had I not already formed the conviction that causing gratuitous pain is wrong. The latter conviction is the one whose existence CI hopes to explain.➃ We must distinguish CI from divine inspiration. Many people believe that a god has shared his infallible moral knowledge with them, but CI does not suppose divine intervention. It claims a more direct causal impact of moral truth on our minds. CI, in the stark form I present, was once more popular among professional philosophers than it is now.➄ It remains influential among many nonphilosophers, however, some of whom take more seriously than they should the familiar rhetoric of moral “insight.” Moreover, many of the best philosophers are unwilling to entirely abandon the hypothesis; they hope to retain at least some remnant or faint echo of the idea that moral truth can cause moral belief, in order to avoid the frightening conclusion that moral beliefs are accidents.➅

However, we do not have even the shadow of a hint how any such causal interaction could operate. Our scientists have begun, at least, to understand the optics, neural chemistry, and brain geography that figure in a competent explanation of how the rain in France produces thoughts about itself. But nothing in that story could be expanded to explain how the unfairness of affirmative action, if any, could produce thoughts about itself. We are ignorant, I assume, of most of what there is to know about what the universe contains or how our brains work. But it is difficult for us even to imagine how CI could be true. Compare mental telepathy. Relatively few people believe, I think, that one person, by concentrating mightily, can cause another person thousands of miles away to have stipulated thoughts. But we might well imagine at least the rough shape of discoveries that could change our minds about this possibility. We might construct controlled experiments that would make the phenomenon difficult to deny: masses of repeated instances of events that could be explained in no other way. We might then discover or at least speculate about external electrical fields that are created by the internal electrical transfers in brains that neurologists now report and measure. True, mental telepathy goes well beyond what science can so far test or explain. But CI goes much further. After all, we already believe in the causal power of mental events: we believe that emotions can cause physiological changes and that one thought can lead to another. CI cannot claim even to extrapolate from those phenomena. It supposes that a moral truth that has neither mental nor physical dimension can nevertheless have causal power.

We cannot imagine how any experimental evidence could suggest the truth of CI even in the absence of an explanation of how it works, as evidence might suggest the truth of telepathy even if we lacked any theory of its mechanics. For we cannot test CI in the way we most naturally test causal claims: by asking a counterfactual question. We can test the claim that someone in Australia sneezed because you willed this by asking whether he would have sneezed even if you had not so willed. But we cannot test CI in that way—if we think that affirmative action is unfair, we cannot produce or even imagine a different world in which everything else is the same except that affirmative action is fair. That is what philosophers mean who say that moral attributes “supervene” on ordinary facts: they mean that we cannot vary moral attributes except by varying the ordinary facts that make up the case for claiming those attributes. We can certainly ask whether you would still think affirmative action unfair even if you discovered that it made no one unhappy. But a negative answer would only confirm that you hold some moral opinion that connects wrongness and suffering. We can’t sensibly ask whether you would still think affirmative action unfair even if it wasn’t unfair, and it is that latter question we would need to ask to test CI’s claim that the unfairness of affirmative action has made you think it unfair.

Because we can make no sense of that crucial counterfactual question, we have no way to test whether the offered explanation of your belief—that it was caused by a perception of moral truth—is accurate. The competing explanations a scientist might offer can be tested by asking whether, if your personal history had been sufficiently different, your beliefs would have been different. There might well be good reason to think they would have been. You can’t offer a parallel counterfactual hypothesis to support your competing “perception” explanation: you can’t show or even imagine that your belief would be different if the moral truth were different. Your claim that you have perceived the truth is only an emphatic restatement of your belief, not an explanation of how it arose.

CI is a myth. It is, moreover, a pointless myth, because even if we assumed that moral truth does have mysterious causal potency, that assumption could be of no help whatsoever in justifying our moral beliefs. We would have to know, independently, whether those beliefs were true before we could intelligibly cite truth as their parent. That requirement is particularly clear when you offer to explain someone else’s moral opinions. You think that affirmative action is unfair but your friend thinks it perfectly fair. You cannot think that his belief is caused by the truth; if you want to explain his belief you must compose a personal-history explanation. You find one that you think complete and persuasive: you cite his education in a knee-jerk liberal family. But now you change your own mind: you are suddenly convinced by his arguments that affirmative action is fair. You now think that what your friend believes is true, but you have discovered nothing that could impeach your earlier explanation of why he believes it. If the personal-history explanation was adequate before, it remains adequate now. You may be tempted now to say that, after all, the truth did play a role in the causal story of how he came to think what he does. But that shows only that CI is never more than a fifth, spinning wheel in any explanation.

It is this fact—that CI is otiose—that provides the final argument against it. Perhaps there are as yet unimagined receptors in the human brain and as yet unimagined forces in the universe such that those forces do cause people to form moral beliefs. Perhaps the best explanation of this process is teleological: perhaps we will one day discover that the universe is evolving toward a predestined goal and that the existence and convictions of self-conscious creatures are parts of the plan. Imagine that scientists have discovered and can measure these influences and can discern the trajectory of the universe’s great strategy. They find that whenever the pertinent instruments report a peculiar force of a certain strength in a field, everyone in the neighborhood declares that a morally wrong act is occurring. None of these people can explain why the act is wrong; they can say only that they “see” or “intuit” that it is wrong. We form the hypothesis that the peculiar force causes moral conviction, and we test that hypothesis by developing protective clothing that shields people from that force. We find that many people so protected form and express moral beliefs different from those of nonprotected people, but that when the protective clothing is removed they change their mind and join the general opinion. We conclude that the peculiar force does cause people to form moral beliefs.

Nothing in this story even begins to suggest, however, that the force causes people to form true moral beliefs. Nothing suggests that the force is in some way equivalent to or evidence of moral truth. So nothing so far supports CI. How could we show that the beliefs the force causes people to have are true beliefs? Only by thinking about the moral issues ourselves, wearing the protective clothing. Only if we come to think, immune from the force, that these beliefs really are true.➆ But we are then back in our original situation. So this scientific way of trying to establish CI would actually undermine it. We could not think that the force caused our own belief in the truth of the beliefs it causes in others; if we did we would be begging our question. We would have to suppose that we could be “in touch with” moral truth in some other way that did not involve CI in order to know which of the beliefs any peculiar force causes are true. CI is pointless. I hope it is now clear that we need not be Luddite about unknown forces or teleological processes to reject the causal impact hypothesis. CI is not a mistake about what there is. It is a confusion about what can count as an argument for the truth of a moral conviction. Only moral argument can. CI is a mistake because it violates Hume’s principle.

Some moral philosophers have fallen into the fashion of speaking of their “intuitions” in moral matters. There are two ways to understand that usage. We might take them to mean that they have in some way or to some degree perceived the truth of what they claim as an intuition. If so, then they mean to offer their intuition as an argument for the truth of what they say they have intuited, as an eyewitness does, for instance, when he says he saw the accused at the scene of the crime. They claim some version of CI. Or they might mean simply to report what they believe, which of course supplies nothing by way of argument. Several times in this book I report what I believe about ethical and moral issues, and I seek to elicit your agreement and to remind you of what, I hope, you also believe. In Chapter 6 I speak about the importance of such beliefs: they determine, in part, what counts as ethical and moral responsibility. But they are not independent arguments for what you or I believe.

The Causal Dependence Hypothesis

Too Quick?

CI is driven by fear of external skepticism, and that fear is in turn driven by CD, the causal dependence hypothesis, which holds that if moral truth does not cause moral opinion, then people can have no reliable or responsible grounds for those opinions.➇ A quick proof is available that CD is false: it refutes itself. I assume that CD cannot be restricted to the domain of morality. It can make sense, if at all, only as a general claim about knowledge. It must insist that we cannot form a reliable belief about anything (except, perhaps, purely logical truths) unless our belief has been caused by what it reports. So the hypothesis is victim to a paradox: if it is true, then we can have no reason for thinking it true. CD is not true by definition: it does not follow from the meaning of the concepts it employs. And whether or not we can make sense of moral causation, we can surely make none of philosophical causation. A great many philosophers, as I said, believe that CD is true. But almost none of them thinks, I assume, that the truth of CD has itself caused them to believe that CD is true, that the universe contains philons with causal power over human minds. If they did think that, they could not consistently deny the existence of morons. They would have to accept CI.

Many philosophers distrust that kind of argument. It seems too quick a refutation of what many very distinguished philosophers believe. I think, on the contrary, that the paradox is not only a decisive argument against CD but also a helpful one, because it suggests that if we are to discover why CD has had such great appeal for moral philosophers on both sides of the skepticism debate, we must look to something distinctive about morality—some fear that seems lively when we puzzle about substantive moral issues but not about issues in philosophy.

Another and slightly longer version of much the same argument is equally illuminating. CD is not directly a claim about the truth of moral judgments even though it does figure prominently in popular skeptical arguments. It is directly a claim only about the reasons people do or do not have to believe any judgment true. We count all sorts of reasons as good reasons for the judgments we make, and what we count as a good reason depends on the content of those judgments. Any theory about adequate physical evidence for some judgment—about the rain in France this morning, for instance—is itself a scientific theory. So any theory about adequate reasons for accepting a moral judgment must be itself a moral theory. CD, when applied in the moral domain, is itself a moral claim. You need a reason to accept it, and, given Hume’s principle, this must be or include a moral reason. We can imagine some such reason. You might think it wrong to act on the basis of moral judgments that are best explained through your personal history rather than encounters with the truth. But this new judgment, you soon realize, also refutes itself. You did not reach that new judgment through any encounter with the truth. Once again, in this different way, CD undermines any possible reason for accepting CD.

Embarrassing Stories?

But if personal history best explains why we hold the opinions we do, and the truth of those opinions plays no explanatory role, then how can we have any confidence in those opinions? That personal history might have features that make confidence difficult. Suppose I discover that yesterday you had to decide whether to attend a lecture by an unusually charismatic opponent of affirmative action or watch a football game on television. You flipped a coin, it fell tails, you went to the lecture, and you were converted. Now you think affirmative action unfair. The coin flip is an indispensable part of any complete explanation of why you think what you do. That sounds embarrassing. But, still, you have reasons you can offer to anyone who challenges your opinion: the reasons, let us assume, that the lecturer provided. Whether you have good grounds for your new opinion must depend entirely on whether those reasons are, as moral reasons, good ones. That you came by those reasons through the toss of a coin is irrelevant.

In this example, you were persuaded to your new opinions by arguments. Does that matter? Imagine a more bizarre story. Until a year ago you thought affirmative action patently unfair. Then you had occasion to think about the matter again and were convinced, by arguments that suddenly seemed compelling, that it is not unfair. One Tuesday morning you read, in the Science section of your newspaper, of an astounding discovery. Everyone in the world who has had a scalotopic brain scan (don’t ask) thinks that affirmative action is fair, whatever opinion he held before the scan. The evidence is vast and conclusive: there is no possibility of coincidence. You had a scalotopic scan shortly before you rethought and changed your views, and you are left in no doubt that you would not have changed them if you had not had the scan.

Of course you look again at the arguments that convinced you to change your opinion. Indeed, you subject them to much greater scrutiny than you had before. You test them the way a conscientious judge would test a principle he was about to lay down in an important case: you ask how your new view sorts with your more general opinions about the fairness or unfairness of various forms of discrimination or special advantage. You cast the net of your investigation wide: you ask yourself what you think about admissions discrimination in favor of athletes, people with interesting hobbies, and children of alumni, and what you think about positive discrimination in other areas: in choosing brain surgeons for your own operation, for instance. You probe your opinions backward into generality as well as sideways into related issues: you ask what is ever wrong with racial discrimination, and you then ask whether the best answers to that question must also condemn affirmative action. You engage in these complex reflections expecting to find conflict: the scan most probably targeted only your very concrete opinion about affirmative action in university admissions and therefore left you in a state of moral dissonance. But you find, on the contrary, that your new opinion survives all these examinations very well: it is your old opinion that would conflict with your other or more general convictions. The effect of the scan, you now assume, was more general and pervasive than you had thought: it affected widespread shifts throughout the full range of your moral convictions so that all your convictions are now thoroughly integrated with your new views about affirmative action. No matter how you test them, they all seem right to you.

What now? How should you react when you finish being bewildered? Surely your discovery should have some impact on either your opinions or your confidence in those opinions. If CD is correct, it must have a devastating impact. But in fact it can have no impact whatsoever. For a start, you cannot regret having had the scan, at least not for this reason. You have no reason whatever to think you were right before. Even if you embrace CI, and think that moral truth can cause moral conviction, you have no reason to think that your former views enjoyed that benefit. As I said, the only reason you could have to think that truth has caused your moral opinion is an independent belief that your conviction is true, and you now think your present opinions, not your past ones, true. Before the scan you would have had a very strong reason not to have the scan if its results could have been predicted. But now you have the same reason for not regretting the scan; indeed, for thinking yourself fortunate to have had it.

Do you have less reason to suppose your new views correct than you had to think your old ones correct before the scan? No; on the contrary, you now think you have more reason than you had then because you now think your earlier reasons were unsound. Should you now doubt your ability to form any responsible judgment at all on the question of affirmative action? No, because you cannot reject the hypothesis that the brain scan improved your ability to reason about morality. On the contrary, you have some evidence that it did so: you were in error about many moral matters before the scan but are now reasoning better, or so you cannot help but think.

Do you have any reason to think yourself irresponsible if you act on your new convictions? As it happens, a referendum proposing a ban on affirmative action is scheduled to be held in your state soon. Should you abstain in that election? Abstention means one less vote against what you think would be either serious injustice or stupid policy, and that one vote might be decisive. Nothing you believe licenses abstention; it would be irresponsible, not responsible. You might think that you should now treat your convictions about affirmative action as untrustworthy, no matter how right they seem to you, and not vote for that reason. But then you need a theory about the right way to form convictions, and no plausible theory paints your convictions as untrustworthy. You listened to arguments on both sides, composed a principled account of when racial criteria are and are not permissible, and tested your principles against your other convictions and hypothetical cases you took care to imagine. Very few of your fellow citizens have reflected as carefully. On what ground could you think your opinions less trustworthy than theirs? Their opinions, like your new opinions, reflect their personal history; their opinions are no more than yours downstream of any validating causal process. The difference is that your personal history seems more bizarre and that difference must be irrelevant.

Even in this absurd invented case, that is, when your opinions are laughably accidental, you cannot find any respect in which that matters. So we should have no fear in conceding that everyone’s moral opinions are accidental in the following sense: if their lives had been different enough, their beliefs would have been different as well. Any sting in that concession will be drawn if we have taken the main lesson of this part of the book—the independence of morality—to heart. Morality stands or falls on its own credentials. Moral principle can be neither vindicated nor impeached except through its own connivance. I have been laboring the crucial distinction between the explanation and the justification of a moral conviction. The former is a matter of fact, and the latter of morality. Moral responsibility is also a moral matter: we need a theory of what questions we must have asked ourselves before we are entitled to hold and act on a moral opinion. That is the subject of Chapter 6. But no theory of moral responsibility can plausibly denounce someone as irresponsible just because some embarrassing feature of his personal history best explains why he came to think his moral arguments good ones, provided that those arguments are reasonable and adequately deep.

We must judge CD, which is a theory of moral responsibility, as a moral thesis: about moral epistemology. We can accept it only if we can make a compelling moral case in its favor. But we cannot. Facts about how someone tested his moral opinions are indeed pertinent, as we shall later see, in judging whether he has acted responsibly in holding, expressing, and following them. But nothing turns on the best causal explanation of how he came to the opinions he tests or, indeed, of how he decided what tests to use.

Conviction and Accident

But isn’t it worrying that your most profound moral convictions are only accidents and therefore can be only accidentally true? If affirmative action is fair and you think it is, then haven’t you been as lucky as the man who believes, correctly, that the time is 3:15 because his watch stopped at that time yesterday? You have been lucky because nothing in the best explanation of how you came to form your view—perhaps you did flip a coin to decide whether to hear a lecture—bears any relation to the truth of that view. That seems appalling: if it really is only an accident when your convictions are true, then—given the number of possible moral convictions—it is very unlikely that your convictions are true.➈

But we must separate the two questions I just mangled together. Is it only an accident that you hold the convictions you do? Is it only an accident if what you believe is true? The first is a question of explanation and the second of justification, so we need different definitions of accident for the two. The first asks whether your history might well have been different in such a way that your opinions would now be different. If we set aside determinism, which holds that your history could not have been different, the answer is certainly yes. If you had not gone to the affirmative action lecture, you would not have heard the arguments that convinced you. More generally: if you had been raised in a very different moral culture, a great many of your convictions would probably have been different. You might well think that gun control laws are tyranny. You might, indeed, think that you have a moral duty to kill unbelievers.

But all our even mildly theoretical beliefs, not just our moral convictions, are accidental in the same way. I believe that the earth is about four and a half billion years old. If my parents had died young, however, and I had been adopted by a fundamentalist family, I might well have the different belief that a god created the universe only very recently. None of my beliefs about the physical world is immune from that kind of contingency. The great popularity, around here, of most of those beliefs doesn’t make the fact that I hold those beliefs any less contingent. That is also true of my philosophical beliefs. Many of the philosophers who accept the causal dependence hypothesis might well have rejected it had their education led them to graduate studies in a different philosophy department from the one they chose. (We should not, however, exaggerate either the contingency of beliefs or the importance of that contingency.➉)

The second question invokes a different sense of accident. It is only an accident that someone believes what is true if his reasons for thinking it true are bad ones. That is why the true belief of the man with the stopped watch is only an accident. If you flipped a coin and then declared affirmative action fair just because it came up tails, your belief, though true, would be accidental in the same way. On this view of accident, whether our moral convictions can be true other than accidently is itself a large moral question. Are there ways of thinking about moral issues that are reasonably well calculated to identify moral truth and, if so, what are those ways? Any answer is, of course, itself part of an overall moral theory. If, as I claim in Chapter 6, there are such ways of thought, and if you have followed them, then it is no accident if the convictions you tested in those ways are true.

It will now be objected that I am cheating: that we must estimate the chances that our moral convictions are true not by assuming the truth of some of them, such as our convictions about good moral reasoning, but by imagining that we had no opinions at all and drew them all, one by one, randomly from a jar that held some true but mainly false ones. We should ask: What would the odds be that all or any of the convictions we drew from that jar turned out to be true? But this is a catastrophically misleading suggestion: we cannot imagine reasoning as a lottery. Even if we could separate all our convictions as distinct marbles drawn from a jar, we could not judge the odds of having drawn out a true one if we had put our mathematical opinions into the jar as well.

We must assume the truth of some convictions to make any judgment, even a probability judgment, about the truth of any other conviction, and once we have done that the truth of other convictions must be a matter of judgment or inference, not chance. Any thought of a lottery disappears. The key methodological question is always one of degree: What and how much should we assume is true in order to judge all or part of the rest? It would be pointless to ask what the chances are of any moral conviction being true without some assumptions about what makes a moral conviction true. The supposition that all moral opinions are equally likely to be true is itself a moral opinion—and a crazy one. But when you allow yourself even indispensable opinions about good moral reasoning, then any thought that your other moral convictions could be only accidentally true evaporates. The fear of accident, though epidemic, is only another symptom of not fully grasping the independence of value, of thinking that somehow, somewhere, there must be some tether to the causal order if morality is not to float away into airy nothing.

Integrated Epistemology

The causal dependence hypothesis is a piece of Archimedean epistemology, and Archimedean epistemology is misconceived. There is no such thing as an entirely abstract condition on knowledge.⑪ Every thought is a thought about something and depends, for its sense and plausibility, on what it is a thought about. Responsibility in science means, at least for the most part, responding to evidence, and something is genuine evidence of some fact only if it exists because that fact exists. That explains why CD is plausible in science. It also explains why CD is senseless in those domains, like morality, that are matters of argument, not evidence. Archimedean epistemology fails because a theory of knowledge must take its place in and with the rest of our opinions. Abstract epistemology and concrete belief must fit and support each other, and neither must be given a veto over the other.

We need integrated epistemology: we must make assumptions about what is true in order to test theories about how to decide what is true. Our scientific method, for instance, assumes the truth of what we believe about optics and biology, even though we use scientific method to confirm our optics and our biology. The whole intellectual structure fits and stands together. So it is a mistake to give some epistemological axiom priority over the rest of our convictions. It is an equally grave mistake, of course, to give any concrete conviction priority over the general epistemology that we develop in this mutually sustaining way. We must not ask our epistemology to make way for whatever it would be nice to believe. Astrology makes causal claims—about the influence of planetary orbits on the arrival times of handsome strangers—that cannot be made to fit the requirements on causal explanation that we have developed in constructing the science in which we have overall such faith. We cannot arrive at an integrated set of theories and opinions that includes both science and astrology, and for a thousand reasons it is the latter that we must set aside.

The popularity of religious conviction is a more difficult challenge to integrated epistemology. Thoughtful people carve out, in the name of their religion, what seem to be stark exceptions to their general opinions about the conditions of respectable belief. These exceptions rely on “miracles”; these include the foundational miracle of an eternal mind existing without brain and with absolutely unlimited power to will anything else into existence. Religious philosophers have tried with great ingenuity to weld these miracles into a general epistemology. Some try to show that scientific method, as we have otherwise developed and conceived this, does indeed explain the miracles that religion claims. Some argue in the other direction: that general epistemology must be revised and expanded to include religious experience and acceptance of miracles. Both efforts respect the need for an integrated epistemology.

A recently popular argument for God’s existence—the argument from intelligent design—illustrates the first of these strategies.⑫ This insists that certain primitive forms of life are irreducibly complex: if anything in their structure were different, they could not survive; they therefore could not have evolved from simpler forms. We must conclude, according to this argument, that they were created by a supernatural being with the attributes traditionally credited to the Abrahamic God. I believe that this argument is scientifically weak.⑬ But it is nevertheless an argument that hopes to explain the miracle of creation in a recognizably scientific way: by showing that the best causal explanation of certain phenomena requires us to accept what are in effect religious hypotheses. The advocates of intelligent design include many people who formerly held the opinion I described earlier: that a god made the earth and life on it only fairly recently and in seven days. No doubt their conversion to intelligent design was accelerated by legal decisions holding that “creationism,” which is what they called their young-earth theory, could not be taught in public schools because it is based on biblical authority, not scientific evidence.⑭ But the conversion may also have been hastened by a strong impulse to unite their religion with their more general opinions about proper reasoning.

The second strategy for reconciling religion with integrated epistemology is used by philosophers who argue that our theories about what and how we know must be sensitive to the full range of what we find we cannot help but believe. Some people—many hundreds of millions of people—believe that their lives include a vast variety of religious experiences. They believe they have transcendent perceptions of a god in the world: their sense of awe, they think, properly grounds their religious conviction unless the conviction is defeated by known arguments. They cannot make an independent case—independent of the bare authority of those perceptions—that the perceptions are correct and not illusions. But in the opinion of these philosophers we do better to take these perceptions at face value than to reject them, because we could reject them only by begging the question—by insisting on an Archimedean epistemology that rules them out.⑮

This argument seems to me also to fail, and for a reason that is pertinent to this chapter. If the validity of religious convictions is said to turn on the existence of a cognitive faculty analogous to perception, then a host of famously difficult questions arise. We can fit the more familiar forms of perception—those delivered by the five senses—into an integrated epistemology because our biology, physics, and chemistry explain how those senses function in a way that shows why they can be trusted. True, as I said, there is a certain circularity in this account: we rely on sense perception to confirm the tenets of biology, physics, and chemistry that we use to validate sense perception. But that is the kind of circularity that integrates conviction and epistemology across an entire domain of thought; that is what integrated epistemology means. If we declare our faith in some special religious form of perception, however, we have no way of integrating our belief in the faculty that delivers that perception with any more general account of how that faculty functions. We must just declare an ad hoc faculty of perception and then grant that others may sensibly claim a special faculty of detecting ghosts or communicating with the dead.

Moreover, if religious conviction rests on perception, then how can we explain the diversity of religious opinion among people? What explains why so many people—nonbelievers and believers in a very different faith—are mistaken? Some people hold an internal explanation of diversity and error: that their god grants his grace only to those he has chosen to receive it.⑯ But that is too tightly circular to count as an answer when the claim of perception is challenged; once again it does nothing to integrate general epistemology and religious conviction. We need a less question-begging explanation, and none seems available except the unhelpful claim that some people lack a faculty that others have. Is there any evidence of this defect, in those who have it, other than their inability to “see” what true believers claim they have “seen”?

These are exactly the questions that have traditionally been used to embarrass the causal impact hypothesis. We can find no place in an integrated epistemology for a special moral faculty that enables people to “intuit” the fairness or injustice of affirmative action or the wickedness or wisdom of abortion. But we can defend the responsibility of our moral convictions without relying on the causal impact hypothesis, because the causal dependence theory is also false. So perhaps we can defend the reasonableness of religious conviction without supposing any special faculty of religious perception. But religious convictions face a formidable burden in finding a place within an integrated epistemology that moral convictions do not face. Moral convictions, just in themselves, make no causal claims. Of course, causal hypotheses about the physical, social, and mental world figure in the justification of particular moral claims. No plausible case for or against affirmative action ignores its consequences, and of course the evidence we cite for any view of those consequences must respect the requirements of the pertinent science.

But justifying a moral judgment never requires appeal to extraordinary modes of causation. Morality needs no miracles. Conventional religious judgments, on the contrary, are shot through with extraordinary causal claims about the creation of matter and life and the workings of nature. These causal claims are indispensable to the historical and contemporary appeal of most religions. Whether a believer attempts to vindicate these claims through an appeal to perception, or through some other explanation of their source, he must in any case justify the causal claims that are part of their content, and it is difficult to see how miracles—exceptions to the causal mechanics that must figure in any integrated epistemology—can be avoided. Even if the intelligent design movement were able to show that neo-Darwinian theory could not explain the origin of species, it would face an independent and formidable challenge in explaining how the hypothesis of a supernatural designer could explain it.

So integrated epistemology must guard against two tyrannies: the tyranny of an Archimedean ambition that is insensitive to the content of particular intellectual domains, and the rival tyranny of dogmatic adherence to some discrete conviction—about gods or ghosts or what is good or what is wrong—that requires an ad hoc, made-for-the-occasion exception to the best account of how we form reliable belief in the broad domain of that conviction. I agree, however, that in the end raw, undefeated conviction must play a decisive role in any honest search for an integrated epistemology; there may be propositions that we find we cannot but believe, even after the most sustained reflection. Then we must not pretend not to believe them but must instead struggle to explain why we are justified, in spite of the difficulties, in believing what we do. We may not succeed, but the struggle is better than the pretense.

That seems to me the situation of many people of deep religious conviction who cannot but believe: their faith endures even when they accept that they lack a good account of how that faith can be woven into a general account of causation that sustains its causal claims. If you can’t help believing something, steadily and wholeheartedly, you’d better believe it, not of course because the fact of your belief argues for its truth but because you cannot think any argument a decisive refutation of a belief it does not loosen. In the beginning and in the end is the conviction. The struggle for integrity lies in between.

Moral Progress?

If we abandon the causal impact and causal dependence hypotheses, do we lose any other convictions of independent importance? Crispin Wright suggests one ground of concern.⑰ If we abandon all claims of causal impact, then we can no longer explain moral progress in what might seem an appealing way: as the gradual falling away of impediments to the impact of moral truth on human sensibility. Of course we would not then have to deny the reality of moral progress. Anyone who is convinced that slavery is wrong and knows that his view is now shared by a great many people will think that general moral opinion has improved at least in that respect since slavery was widely practiced and defended. Perhaps sufficient other examples can be found to allow us the much more ambitious claim that moral opinion has improved broadly on all fronts. How much progress we think we can claim, in that simple comparative sense, depends only on our own moral convictions and our sociological and historical beliefs about the distribution of parallel convictions now and in the past.

True, we might be able to explain why what we take to be progress occurred. We might find personal-history explanations that show why the mistaken beliefs are outdated: that people who defended slavery held false empirical beliefs, for instance, or that the economy that sustained slavery has been transformed. Some people might offer different kinds of explanation. Those who think that a god is the source of moral knowledge may believe that that god has gradually unfolded his moral plan to more and more of his children. Utilitarians may suppose that moral error gradually disappears because people who suffer have a greater incentive to press for egalitarian principles than other people have for resisting those principles.⑱

It is important to notice, however, that none of these causal historical explanations helps to confirm our initial claim of moral progress. That initial judgment rests entirely on our conviction that slavery is wrong, and we assume rather than support that conviction when we describe past influences as distorting or assume that slavery is offensive to a god or suppose that economics has produced a better state of affairs. So we are entitled to no more confidence in our judgment of progress when we can offer such explanations than when we can say only that earlier generations did not “see” some moral truth that we do. In either case we are relying finally on our conviction and on the moral case that we believe supports it. We would be in no better situation if the causal impact hypothesis were true. We would need some independent judgment that our contemporary views were improvements before we could claim that moral truth figured in the explanation of the progress we claim, and that independent judgment of improvement, on its own, is all we could mean by progress.

===============================================================================
p.437

➀ You shouldn’t think this. See my Sovereign Virtue (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000), 409–26.

➁ See G. E. Moore, Principia Ethica (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1903); Richard Price, Review of the Principal Questions in Morals (1757).

➂ Moral naturalism, discussed in Chapter 3, supports the causal impact hypothesis. If moral properties are identical to natural properties, and these natural properties interact with human minds, then moral properties do that as well. Nicholas Sturgeon’s argument along those lines is framed as a response to an influential book by Gilbert Harman. See Sturgeon, “Moral Explanations,” in David Copp and David Zimmerman, eds., Morality, Reason and Truth (Totowa, N.J.: Rowman and Allanheld, 1985), 49–79, reprinted in Arguing about Metaethics, ed. Andrew Fisher and Simon Kirchin (New York: Routledge, 2006), 117. Harman argued that moral facts, if there were any, could not explain our moral convictions, and concluded that there are no moral facts. See Harman, The Nature of Morality: An Introduction to Ethics (New York: Oxford University Press, 1977). Sturgeon challenges Harman’s premise. He thinks the fact that Hitler was a monster explains what Hitler did, and what Hitler did explains why we think him a monster, so this is an instance of a moral truth explaining a moral conviction. Harman said that we must test this sort of causal claim by asking a counterfactual question: Would we still have believed Hitler a monster even if he wasn’t? If the answer to that question is no, then we can conclude that Hitler’s being a monster caused us to think him one. But, Harman says, we have no reason to think the answer is no. Sturgeon points out correctly that we can understand the counterfactual two ways. We may take it to ask whether, if Hitler’s behavior had been different in ways that made him not a monster, we would have believed him one. The answer to that question probably is, at least for most of us: no. Or we can take it to ask whether, if Hitler was what he was and did what he did, but that didn’t make him a monster, we would have believed him one. Sturgeon rightly says that the premise of the question so understood is unintelligible because it asks us to imagine a different world exactly like ours, with Hitler behaving exactly as he did, but different only in the single fact that in that world Hitler wasn’t a monster. If there were morons—moral particles whose configuration made moral judgments true or false—this might make sense. The other world could be just like ours except that the morons were differently arranged. But because moral judgments are true in virtue of reasons, not morons, the premise of this counterfactual is indeed unimaginable.

Sturgeon draws two conclusions and twice runs these together. First, he concludes that because the only intelligible way of framing Harman’s counterfactual yields, at least for most people, a negative answer, Hitler’s monstrosity must explain why most people think him a monster. But that is a mistake, because on that understanding the counterfactual doesn’t bear on the question of causation at all. The ghost of Joseph Goebbels knows all the historical facts that made Hitler a monster, but these facts haven’t caused that ghost to hold my opinion. It does seem natural to say that Hitler’s being a monster explains why he acted as he did, and why I think him a monster. But that is best understood as a compressed statement of the following fuller version. Hitler’s personality caused him to act as he did and, because I think people who act as he did are monsters, his personality in that way caused me to think him a monster. Nothing in that fuller description attributes causal power to the truth that Hitler was a monster, and the fuller description leaves nothing out that is causally relevant. (See Crispin Wright, Truth and Objectivity [Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1992], 195.) Sturgeon draws a second conclusion: that Harman is wrong in thinking his argument licenses the skeptical conclusion that there are no moral facts. I agree. Harman is wrong to draw that conclusion even though he is right that moral facts don’t cause moral convictions, because the causal dependence thesis I discuss in the next section is false.

➃ Mark Johnston argues persuasively, against expressivist and dispositional accounts of aesthetic and moral qualities, that beauty is not in the eye of the beholder (“The Authority of Affect,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 63, no. 1 [2001]: 181). Your lover really is beautiful, although you might have to take the right interest in her to see it. You do not reason or infer her beauty. You see it the way a chessmaster sees a stalemate in three moves. But this cannot be, in either of those cases, a causal kind of perception. You see that the boys burning a cat are depraved, but the sense in which you see that provides no further evidence or argument for their depravity as an eyewitness’s seeing does provide further evidence of a stabbing. If someone disagreed with your judgment, and you were able to provide some argument in its favor, that argument wouldn’t turn on your truthfulness or your ability to detect depravity or whether you were in the right position to detect it. It would turn on the reasons you offered to show that what the boys were doing was depraved. Your immediate moral and aesthetic reactions reflect experience and deep assumptions, the way the chessmaster’s reaction does; any argument about beauty or depravity that follows your claim would be a justification, not a more detailed report of what you saw.

➄ Plato, Phaedrus 247e–249d; Phaedo Ph. 65e–66a; G. E. Moore, Principia Ethica (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1903). See also the moral sense theorists: e.g., Shaftesbury, An Inquiry Concerning Virtue, or Merit (1699); Reid, An Inquiry into the Human Mind on the Principles of Common Sense, ed. Derek R. Brookes (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1997); Hutcheson, An Essay on the Nature and Conduct of the Passions and Affections. With Illustrations on the Moral Sense (Dublin: J. Smith and W. Bruce, 1728).

➅ I describe three such theories here.

Nagel. Morality, on Thomas Nagel’s view, is a matter not of occult particles but of reasons. People have a faculty of reason, and this faculty allows them, in the right circumstances, to reach credible conclusions about what they have most reason to do. They exercise this faculty by a process of progressive objectification, that is, by struggling to prescind from their own particular desires, interests, and ambitions to consider what reasons people in general, or no one in particular, has for action. Through this process people are able to leave behind their personal perspective, which their own interests dominate, to struggle toward an impersonal perspective from which moral judgment is possible. (Nagel, The View from Nowhere [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986], chapters 8 and 9.)

I discuss Nagel’s contrast between these two perspectives at several points in this book. Its pertinence now lies in the connection it draws between two issues: the best explanation of how moral opinion is formed and whether moral opinion can be objectively true. He takes the key question in the contest over the latter issue to be whether the process of objectification he describes is possible for human beings or whether they are inevitably trapped in a personal perspective, limited by their own interests and inclinations.

 The subjectivist would have to show that all purportedly rational judgments about what people have reason to do are really expressions of rationally unmotivated desires or dispositions of the person making the judgment—desires or dispositions to which normative assessment has no application. The motivational assumption would have to have the effect of displacing the normative one—showing it to be superficial and deceptive … Subjectivism involves a positive claim of empirical psychology. (The Last Word [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997], 110–11.)

“Express” in this context is a causal, not a semantic, idea. The subjectivist argues that people’s moral convictions are best explained as the upshot of personal desires or dispositions rather than judgments they make from some impersonal standpoint that allows those desires and dispositions no causal role. Nagel believes that the subjectivist cannot show that this “displacement” occurs in every case. But that is, as he says, a question of empirical psychology, and we might therefore test Nagel’s description of the crux of the contest by imagining that the subjectivist succeeds. The subjectivist is able to show that personal inclinations and other aspects of personal history always figure indispensably in any full explanation of why someone holds the moral opinions he does. Why would any form of skepticism follow from that empirical demonstration?

Hume’s principle stands in the way. The empirical fact that no one holds a moral opinion that is not best explained by his hidden desires cannot by itself make any moral opinion false or not true. You feel passionately that affirmative action is deeply insulting and unfair. You believe that your opinion states an objective truth; it would still be true, that is, even if everyone came to think the opposite. Your psychotherapist convinces you, however, that some long-forgotten but traumatic childhood experience, when you were denied a treat in order that someone less fortunate might have it, provides the best explanation of why you hold that conviction so passionately; in fact, he convinces you that but for that long-forgotten trauma you would not think affirmative action unfair. It would hardly follow that affirmative action is not, after all, unfair. That depends on the moral arguments that can be made in favor of that moral conclusion, not whether your appreciation of those arguments was the sole cause of your forming the conviction. So the empirical triumph of the subjectivist would be of no use in establishing his philosophical position. Later in this chapter I imagine that everyone who has had a certain brain scan thinks affirmative action fair. I argue that those who changed their minds after a brain scan have no reason, just in that fact, to revert to their former opinion. The empirical demonstration Nagel imagines is only a more easily conceivable example than that one.

How someone has reached his convictions does bear on moral responsibility but not on whether his convictions are objectively true. I distinguish responsibility from truth in Chapter 6, and I argue that no one is morally responsible unless he draws his opinions from a reasonably well-integrated and authentic system of conviction. But even moral responsibility would not be undermined by the subjectivist’s success in his empirical claims. Responsibility requires the integration I just described, but it is not destroyed by any deeper explanation of why an agent has come to hold the convictions that he has successfully integrated. So neither the soundness nor the responsibility of our convictions can be challenged by the subjectivist’s empirical psychology.

Wiggins. David Wiggins has been energetic in the project to salvage something from the causal impact hypothesis. He calls it a “mark” of truth that a proposition p, in any domain, can be true only if there are circumstances in which someone can believe that p “precisely because p.” He thinks that this condition is fulfilled when “there is nothing else to think” but p, so that the question whether moral judgments can be true is the question whether there can be circumstances in which that condition holds. I state his interesting argument at length.

 My suggestion is that someone believes that p precisely because p … if there is a good explanation of their coming to believe that p which leaves the explainer himself no room to deny that p … The first example may as well be perceptual: “Look, the cat is on the mat. So, given John’s perceptual capacities and his presence near the cat, no wonder he believes the cat is on the mat. There is nothing else for him to think about the cat and the mat.” This explanation, which leaves no room to deny that the cat is on the mat, answers the question, “Why does John believe the cat is on the mat?” Next, and in the second place, consider the analogous but utterly different question, “Why does Peter believe 7 + 5 = 12?” and an explanation that runs on the following pattern: “Look, 7 + 5 = 12; no calculating rule that makes it possible to use numbers to count things leaves room for any other answer. [Explainer proves this.] So no wonder Peter, who understands the calculating rule which leaves no room for any other answer, believes that 7 + 5 = 12.” Let us call such explanations for the existence of a belief vindicatory explanations of the belief … By the same token, ethical objectivism will be committed (simply by virtue of its commitment to the possibility of truth in ethics) to saying that an ethical subject matter, no less than perceptual and arithmetical subject matters, will admit vindicatory explanations of (at least some) moral beliefs. An example might run as follows: “Look, slavery is wrong, it’s wrong because … [here are given many, many considerations, fully spelled out, appealing to what someone already knows and understands if they know what slavery is and what ‘wrong’ means, all these considerations working together to leave no alternative, for one who is so informed, but to think that slavery is wrong]; so no wonder twentieth-century Europeans, who would accept that … and whose beliefs are so many of them downwind of such considerations as … believe that slavery is wrong. They believe that it is wrong for just the kind of reasons why there is nothing else to think but that it is wrong.” (Wiggins, Ethics: Twelve Lectures on the Philosophy of Morality [Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2006], 366–67.)

Wiggins apparently accepts something like the causal dependence hypothesis I discuss later in the text (notice the reference to “the possibility of truth in ethics”) and tries to satisfy its condition without supposing any mechanism of causal interaction between moral truth and human minds. He thinks it important to proceed as he does here, by considering a perceptual and a mathematical example of there being “nothing else to think” before moving to the moral case. But I believe the quoted phrase has such different import in each of these three contexts that it is more helpful to turn to the moral case, which is our concern, directly. The statement that there is nothing for a modern European to think but that slavery is wrong can naturally be read in two quite different ways. It might be taken to state a psychological or cultural or even biological fact: that for one reason or another a modern European has only one thought on the matter available to him. His education and culture simply do not permit him to doubt that slavery is wicked. Or it might be taken to state a moral truth: that it is so plainly true that slavery is wrong that no other opinion about the matter is even remotely plausible. This latter interpretation must be what the “explainer” means to say if his statement “leaves [him] himself no room to deny” that slavery is wrong. In fact, to serve Wiggins’s purpose, this statement that there is nothing else to think must be read as a combination of the two claims I just distinguished: that a contemporary European cannot possibly think other than that slavery is unjust, and that slavery is plainly unjust. But the combination can achieve nothing more by way of vindication than either claim can on its own. The cultural claim provides an explanation but no vindication; the moral claim presupposes vindication, so it cannot supply any. The slavery example is not after all a case of someone’s “believing that p precisely because p.” (See Crispin Wright’s comments in Truth and Objectivity, 194ff , on Wiggins’s suggestion.)

As I said, Wiggins thinks that the perceptual and mathematical cases help to explain the moral case. But the sense of “there is nothing else to think” is different in these cases, and it may be useful to notice the differences. The cat’s being on the mat probably does cause the thinker to think that the cat is on the mat. We have theories of optics and biology that explain this, or so we think; they explain how the presence of the cat on the mat causes people with normal perceptual, cognitive, and linguistic abilities to think that the cat is on the mat. And that explanation, if successful, does vindicate the perceptual claim. It does leave the explainer unable to deny that the cat is on the mat. In the mathematical case there really is nothing else to think, at least after pertinent training, but that five and seven make twelve (in spite of Descartes’s claim that God could have made it otherwise). But though the position of the cat causes beliefs about its position, seven and five do not cause people to think that together they make twelve. A Darwinian explanation of why it is nevertheless true that there is nothing else to think is popular, however. This supposes that the evolution of human beings could not have proceeded to the point it did long ago if successful techniques of counting and primitive numerical manipulation had not been—as amateurs of evolution often put it—hardwired into their brains, and of course no such techniques could be evolutionarily successful unless they dictated that seven and five make twelve. This explanation does, in that way, implicate truths of mathematics in its account of why people believe true mathematical propositions. But it still falls short of a mathematical version of CI, that is, of supposing that the truths of mathematics themselves exercise any causal influence on human brains. The full neo-Darwinian story, if some version of it actually is plausible, can be told without supposing any such influence: it is not that mathematical truth interacts with human brains, but rather that ancestors of human beings whose brains were not shaped to count properly did not survive. Once again, the difference between that story and common-garden perception of physical facts is striking and important. “I see that it is raining,” said by someone looking out the window, offers a justification for his belief that it is raining. “I see that Fermat’s last theorem can be proved,” said even by a famous mathematician, does not offer even the beginning of a justification for his belief. It only promises a justification that remains to be offered.

Some scientists and philosophers believe that a parallel neo-Darwinian story can be told about the development of some of our moral convictions. They suggest that it helped human beings to evolve that they were members of communities that inculcated the wrongness of the most dramatic forms of antisocial behavior. It is much less clear than it seems in the mathematical case that the survival value of the convictions so inculcated depended on their truth. It may be, for instance, that convictions of savage tribal loyalty were indispensable to the evolution of our species into its present form, but it hardly follows that these convictions, which unfortunately survive, are morally correct. In any case, however, even if we think the convictions that were allegedly essential to survival are all true, it does not follow, any more than it does in the mathematical case, that moral truth, rather than the morally neutral processes of evolution, is causally responsible for their genesis and survival.

McDowell. John McDowell firmly rejects “intuitionism.” (See McDowell, “Projection and Truth in Ethics,” in his Mind, Value, and Reality [Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1998], 157.) He denies that people can perceive value, rightness, or wrongness in objects or events the way they can perceive shape and other purely physical properties. But he also rejects “projectivism,” a form of skepticism that holds that values are not properties of anything in the external world at all, that value judgments must be understood as expressions or projections of attitude onto a normatively blank universe (151). He hopes to develop a third position through an extended, though limited, analogy to the perception of colors and other secondary properties that depend for their sense and truth both on properties of objects and on the phenomenological reactions of human beings to those properties.

He says: “An object’s being red is understood as something that obtains in virtue of the object’s being such as (in certain circumstances) to look, precisely, red” (McDowell, “Values and Secondary Qualities,” in Reason, Value, and Reality, 133). This explanation of color properties does not follow either an intuitionist or a projectivist model: rather it combines observations about the properties of a tomato with those about the reactions people normally have looking at tomatoes. A tomato does not have the property of redness intrinsically; it would not be red if it did not look red in appropriate circumstances. But it would nevertheless be a mistake to deny that a tomato has in itself a property in virtue of which it is red. It has the property of being disposed to produce a certain kind of reaction—a redness reaction—in those circumstances. We can restate that property as a property of surface texture but only when we have determined that it is that texture that accounts for that disposition.

In McDowell’s view, a perceptual model of color therefore has a different structure from either an intuitionist or a projectivist explanation of value. Intuitionism gives an explanatory priority to some property of value inherent in an object or event: it supposes, as McDowell puts it, that the inherent value is the parent of the admiring reaction it produces in people with a suitable sensibility. A projectivist model, in contrast, makes the reaction parent to the property. It supposes that value is only what our reactions paint over the world. But in color perception neither the object nor the reaction is the parent of the other; McDowell calls them siblings (ibid., 166). The characteristic response of people to a red object is indispensable to the phenomenon. But so are the objective features that give the tomato the disposition to evoke that response. McDowell suggests an analogous “sibling” explanation of value: the property of some object in meriting admiration and the admiration it elicits are both essential parts of the explanation of value.

He is careful to notice that the analogy between value judgment and color perception is imperfect, in two ways. The texture of the tomato causes a reasonably well-understood chain of physical events that ends in the redness sensation, but there is no analogous physical series initiated by positive or negative value. Color attribution is rarely contentious—we think we can explain to someone’s satisfaction that a tomato is red even though it does not appear red to him. But value attribution is very often controversial. McDowell thinks these differences do not spoil the usefulness of the comparison. It allows us to recognize the crucial fact that we are not forced to choose between intuitionist and projectivist accounts of value judgment. We can explain the origin of such judgments through an account in which both object and respondent are indispensable, an account that allows us to say that there is indeed value in the world though it arises only in combination with convictions of value in people.

I believe, however, that the differences do destroy the usefulness of the comparison. Causation is central to the sibling story. We cannot suppose that objects themselves contain a color-related property without identifying that property causally: it is the property that accounts for the object’s disposition to cause color reactions. If the causal impact hypothesis I describe in the text is wrong, as McDowell assumes it is in rejecting intuitionism, then we cannot identify a value property in a parallel way. The sibling story therefore has no application to value judgment. It might seem plausible, or at least attractive, to infer from the near-uniform reaction to athletic grace that there must be some property in a graceful performance in virtue of which it is disposed to generate admiration. But we would have no such temptations in the case of controversial moral judgment: capital punishment cannot be thought to house some disposition that makes it either admired or detested.

McDowell seems in other ways to borrow the trappings of causation without its mechanics. He says that it makes sense for people to say, “If the reasons for condemning capital punishment weren’t good reasons, I wouldn’t condemn it.” But, as I said in the text, if those reasons really are good ones, there is no way even to imagine a world otherwise like ours in which they are not, which means no one has any basis for supposing that he would not condemn capital punishment in such a world. McDowell takes from David Wiggins another shadow-of-causation idea: that an explanation of why someone holds the opinions he does can be “vindicatory” because it leaves the explainer no room to deny the opinion so explained. Earlier in this note I discussed Wiggins’s suggestion that we can sometimes explain someone’s conviction by pointing out that “there is nothing else to think.” McDowell suggests that a sibling explanation would also be vindicatory. But it would not be because, again as explained in the text, anyone offering such an explanation would have to have already vindicated, in some other way, the opinion he so explains.

Summary. Philosophers want to find some connection between the way in which we form our moral convictions and the truth of those convictions. Nagel finds the connection in a faculty of reason operating from an impersonal perspective, Wiggins in a Cartesian nothing-else-to-think, and McDowell in a tenuous analogy with sense perception. They hope for some such connection because the alternative I believe correct—the radical independence of the truth of conviction from the manner of its production—strikes them as unsatisfactory. They find it hard to sustain their faith that the world of conviction is a world of truth and yet also accept that we have no better reason for our convictions than the rest of our convictions. However, McDowell elsewhere seems content with the radical independence of moral truth. He accepts the familiar challenge that we must “earn the right” to speak of truth in the moral context and believes that philosophers who appeal to intuitions fail to meet it. But he is clear that the challenge can be met only from within the substance of morality (“Projection and Truth in Ethics”). I would put the point somewhat differently. We do not need to “earn” the raw proposition that moral opinions can be true, because the claims of global skeptics about morality are themselves moral opinions. But we must earn the right to particular moral opinions, including skeptical opinions, if we think those true. In any case, I agree with McDowell that we earn the right he speaks of only in one way: through substantive moral argument that is vindicated by nothing but more moral argument.

➆ Our strange discoveries would, of course, pose other puzzles. If we thought the beliefs the peculiar force caused were invariably true, we would have to account for the correlation. What correlation we thought we had to explain would depend on our independent moral convictions. We might have to show, for instance, a correlation between the force and suffering.

➇ Harman, The Nature of Morality; Sturgeon, “Moral Explanations.”

➈ Sharon Street presses this objection (Street, “Objectivity and Truth: You’d Better Rethink It,” homepages.nyu.edu/~jrs477/Sharon%20Street%20-%20Objectivity%20and%20Truth.pdf). She accepts the main theoretical claims of Part One of this book, but dissents from what she calls my “realism,” by which she means my opinion that moral convictions can be true independently of people’s attitudes. “My strategy,” she says, “… is to adopt wholesale almost all of the major points that Dworkin argues for—but with one major exception … Dworkin’s endorsement of realism—understood exactly as he himself wishes to understand it, namely as an ‘internal’ normative claim.” She prefers a version of internal “antirealism” according to which people only have reasons that are given to them by their own evaluative attitudes. Caligula has reason to torture prisoners for the pleasure he takes in their screams, and no competing moral reason not to do that. She argues that, because the causal impact hypothesis is false, our moral convictions would be extremely unlikely to be true if we took them to be other than mind-dependent in that way. She suggests the following distinction between morality and at least part of our science. Our beliefs about what she calls “manifest surroundings,” like trees and boulders in our neighborhood, are very likely be true because we have an explanation of how we came to those beliefs—a Darwinian explanation—that suggests that they are true. She concedes the sense in which that explanation is circular: Darwinian theory is part of our science and thus part of what we use that theory to explain. But that theory nevertheless provides what she calls “non-trivially question-begging reasons” for believing what we believe. We have nontrivially question-begging reasons for our moral convictions as well, however. Later in this book I defend a general theory of legitimacy in government and I rely on that general theory to support a variety of opinions about the redistribution of a nation’s wealth. That general theory is part of my overall set of convictions, just as Darwinian theory is part of Street’s overall science, and if I am allowed to take the truth of that general theory of equality into account, as she does for Darwinian explanations, then the probability of my observations about redistribution also being true are not tiny but impressive—larger, in my ignorant layman’s view, than the probability that string theory will stand up to later discovery and imagination. In Chapter 6 I describe a theory of moral responsibility: a theory about the responsible way to test our moral and ethical convictions. I believe that the probability of a moral conviction that survives those tests being true is much greater than the probability of convictions that have not been tested in that way or that fail the test. Appealing to a theory of moral responsibility to gauge the plausibility of a conviction about redistribution does not seem any more trivially circular than Street’s appeal to Darwin. “What then is the difference,” she asks, “between the manifest surroundings case and the normative case?” The answer lies in the distinction between answers to the skeptical challenge that provide internal reason to think that the causes might have led us to the hypothesized independent truth versus answers that provide no reason whatsoever to think that the causes might have led us to the hypothesized independent truth. The general question we are asking in both the manifest surroundings case and the normative case is “Why think that the causes described by our best scientific explanations would have led us to the truth in this domain?” In answer to this question, it is unsatisfactory to reply, “My judgments in this domain are true, and they’re also the ones that the causes described by our best scientific explanations led me to.” Such a reply offers no reason for thinking that the causes led us to the truth; it merely reasserts that they did. (Street, “Objectivity and Truth,” 26) This paragraph reveals a hidden premise in Street’s argument: the causal dependence hypothesis. It supposes that if there is no internal causal reason to think our convictions true, it follows that there is no good internal reason at all. That does not follow: the causal dependence hypothesis is false for the reasons I give in this chapter. Moreover, Street elsewhere says that it is false. She says she is not insisting on what she calls a “causal epistemology” for morality. She says she accepts Hume’s principle in the way I understand it; if Hume’s principle is true, then the causal dependence thesis must be false. She only asks, she says, for some epistemology for the normative domains of morality and ethics. But that is exactly what a theory of moral responsibility is meant to provide: it aims to provide a suitable account of the kinds of reasons we ought to have to suppose a conviction true. Any such theory may of course be wrong. But it must be shown wrong by a rival normative theory. Is this trivially circular because a theory of good moral argument is part of the overall moral theory it hopes to defend? We are back to the same point: scientific reasoning is in exactly the same position. So the causal dependence thesis is alive in Street’s arguments, denied but still potent.

➉ Because your personal identity is defined by your genetic composition, many of the imagined stories in which “you” have radically different beliefs are actually stories in which you do not exist. I had to imagine that I was adopted by a fundamentalist family instead of having been born of fundamentalist parents; if I had been born to such parents, I would have been someone else. Many of the most important influences of genes and culture on your beliefs are not accidental but constitutive of your identity. But even if everyone in all ages and places held the same opinions about all matters of moral conviction, even if this consensus was inevitable for deep biological reasons, even if it was therefore false that your opinions might well have been different, none of these facts would provide the slightest evidence that the convictions everyone shares are true. Whether they are true is a matter for moral argument, not personal or species history. We must in any case decide what is better to do, or think or admire, without any historical or cosmic certificate that we are right.

⑪ Chapter 8 qualifies this statement in ways I cannot anticipate in any detail here. It may be possible to construct some very abstract, near-platitudinous statement of requirements on knowledge that hold across all intellectual domains. But this abstract statement would by hypothesis be permissive, not restrictive, of different and less abstract accounts of knowledge in different domains.

⑫ For exposition, see Michael Behe, Darwin’s Black Box: The Biochemical Challenge to Evolution (New York: Free Press, 1996); William Dembski, Intelligent Design: The Bridge between Science and Theology (Downers Grove, Ill.: InterVarsity Press, 1999); Dembski, The Design Inference (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1998).

⑬ See, e.g., Elliot Sober, “What Is Wrong with Intelligent Design?” Quarterly Review of Biology 82, no. 1 (March 2007): 3–8.

⑭ Tammy Kitzmiller, et al. v. Dover Area School District, et al. (400 F. Supp. 2d 707 Docket no. 4cv2688).

⑮ See, e.g., Alvin Plantinga, Warranted Christian Belief (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000).

⑯ See Plantinga’s “Aquinas/Calvin” model, in ibid., 167ff.

⑰ Wright, Truth and Objectivity, 200.

⑱ See Peter Railton, “Moral Realism,” Philosophical Review 95, no. 2 (April 1986): 163–207.

===============================================================================

Key concepts:

accidents (80): explanation (history) vs. justification (moral arguments)
 -a system of interrelated values
 -general and basic convictions
causal dependence hypothesis (CD, 70): unless the causal impact hypothesis is true, people can have no sound reason to think that any of their moral judgments is a correct report of moral truth
 a moral claim
causal impact hypothesis (CI, 70): moral facts can cause people to form moral convictions that match those moral facts
 includes a claim of scientific fact: the causal relation
 vs. devine inspiration (72)
 counterfactual question (73)
 CI is a mistake because it violates Hume’s principle (75)
creationism (84)
science: the causal theory
 the best explanations of belief validate belief

about the paradox of DC:
We form a reliable belief about DC only if our belief about it has been caused by DC.
Assume that DC is true. If it is true and we believe that it is true, then our belief must have been caused by it. Yet it is not true by definition and we are yet to determine if it is true. Since we don't know if it is true, there is no causal effect. Therefore, if it is true, it must be false.

Any theory about adequate physical evidence for scientific judgment is a scientific theory
We count all sorts of reasons as good reasons for the judgments we make, and what we count as a good reason depends on the content of those judgments. Scientific content requires physical evidence. Moral content requires, besides physical evidence, moral reasons. Moral reasons do not cause truth. The truth of CD is yet to be determined.

