5 Internal Skepticism (88)

Typology

Global internal skepticism has long been a potent influence on literature; the ancient philosophers thought it an important position either to defend or to attack. It is a despairing conviction, particularly when it is trained on ethics. Then it holds that life itself has no value or meaning, and, as I argue later in this book, no value of any other kind can survive that dismal conclusion. Once a corrosive, global internal skepticism takes hold of someone, declaring, as Macbeth put it, that life signifies nothing, it may leave him but he cannot refute it. I shall try to confront that despairing form of skepticism in the only way I can: by trying to show, in Chapter 9, the kind of value that it makes sense to suppose a human life can have. I call this adverbial value: it is the value of a good performance in response to an important challenge.

In this brief chapter I concentrate not on rebutting internal skepticism but clarifying it. I offered examples of internal skepticism in Chapter 2. Many of these are negative moral judgments: they do not offer guidance or demand. It is a negative moral judgment, for instance, that morality neither requires nor condemns particular sexual mechanics among consenting adults. Some judgments of internal skepticism take a different form, however. They declare, not that some particular act is neither forbidden nor required, but that there is no correct answer to the question whether it is forbidden or whether it is required—that the wrongness of abortion, for instance, is indeterminate in that way.

We must take care to distinguish such judgments, which are instances of internal skepticism, from certain forms of purported external skepticism. The view I considered at length in Chapter 3, that first-order substantive moral judgments are only projections of emotion or attitude, not reports of a mind-independent moral fact, claims that moral judgments are never either true or false. The indeterminacy judgments I have in mind now are patently substantive moral claims: someone who thinks that there is no right answer to the abortion question, because the arguments on either side are not better than those on the other, may subscribe fully to the ordinary view of morality and hold that a great many other moral judgments are straightforwardly true or false.➀

Indeterminacy judgments are more familiar—and in my view much more often persuasive—in domains of value outside ethics and morality. Some people with either exceptional palates or nerve stand ready to rank the quality of any two bottles of wine: one is always better than the other, they insist, and they are always ready to tell us which. It is certainly an available view, however, that in the case of some wines neither bottle is better than another and they are not exactly equal in quality either. We might say that they are “on a par” with one another.➁ Or we might take an even more radically skeptical view of this matter: that goodness in wine is entirely a subjective matter and that, in spite of the cult of oenophiles, there is no room for objective valuation at all. Then we might say that there is never a right answer to the question which of two wines is best, but only answers to the different question whether some particular person likes one wine better.

Consider two more nonmoral examples of this “no-right-answer” judgment. It is an English country-weekend game (or used to be, before DVDs escaped to the home counties) to compose and debate “greatest” lists. Who was the greater athlete: Donald Budge or David Beckham? The greater statesman: Marcus Aurelius or Winston Churchill? The greater artist: Picasso or Beethoven? It is a tempting response to such questions to deny their sense. We want to say: it is pointless to try to compare talents or achievements across such different challenges, roles, and contexts. The only sensible judgment, we think, is that these talents and achievements are incommensurate. Picasso was neither a greater nor a lesser artist than Beethoven, nor, of course, were the two exactly equal in greatness. They were on a par.

Before the Supreme Court’s recent 5–4 decision in the matter, lawyers debated whether the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution guarantees private citizens the right to keep handguns at home.➂ There were, and remain, popular arguments on both sides. Many lawyers and law students were therefore tempted to say that it is a mistake to think that there is a single right answer to the question. There are only different answers that appeal to different political constituencies and different parties of constitutional theory.

Internal skepticism about morality therefore includes not only negative moral judgments, like the judgment that anything is permissible in sex between consenting adults, but also claims of indeterminacy in moral judgment and incommensurability in moral comparison. We should distinguish both of these from a third and distinct form of internal skepticism, which is moral conflict. Many people think that Antigone had moral duties both to bury and not to bury her brother, so that whatever she did was wrong. They think, not that it is neither true nor false that she had either duty, but true that she had both.➃ This is a claim not of indeterminacy but, we might say, of too much determinacy. I include judgments of conflict for the sake of completeness: they are internally skeptical because they deny that morality provides any guidance in the premises. But they raise special problems for my later argument, and I return to issues of conflict later.

Indeterminacy and Default (90)

In this chapter I discuss mainly “no-right-answer” claims of indeterminacy and incommensurability. When are such judgments appropriate? One surprisingly popular answer is this: in the domains of value—morality, ethics, art, and law—indeterminacy is the default judgment. When, after careful study, no persuasive argument can be found for either side of some moral or aesthetic or ethical or legal question, it is sensible to suppose that there is no right answer to that question. Suppose I am bewildered whether abortion is wicked. Certain arguments or analogies make it seem so to me sometimes, when I am in some moods. But other arguments or analogies make it seem not so at other times. I confess that I lack any secure or stable sense of which of these sets of arguments and analogies is better. Then, according to the default thesis, I ought to conclude that there is no right answer to the question. This approach assumes that though positive arguments are necessary to establish positive claims about moral issues, one way or the other, failure to find such positive arguments is enough to support the indeterminacy claim. Positive claims need arguments of their own: the indeterminacy judgment just needs the failure of argument for anything else.

This thesis is a familiar form of instruction in law schools. Lecturers construct elaborate arguments first for and then against a particular legal claim, and they then announce, generally to the delight of their students, that there is no right answer to the question in dispute. But the default thesis is patently mistaken, because it confuses two different positions—uncertainty and indeterminacy—that it is essential to distinguish. Confessions of uncertainty are indeed theoretically less ambitious than positive claims; uncertainty is indeed a default position. If I see arguments on all sides of some issue and do not find, even after reflection, one set of arguments stronger than the others, then I am entitled without more ado to declare that I am uncertain, that I have no view of the matter. I do not need a further, more substantive, reason beyond my failure to be persuaded of any other view. But in all these respects indeterminacy differs from uncertainty. “I am uncertain whether the proposition in question is true or false” is plainly consistent with “It is one or the other,” but “The proposition in question is neither true nor false” is not. Once uncertainty is taken into account, in some such way, then the default thesis of indeterminacy collapses, because if one of these alternatives—uncertainty—holds by default, then indeterminacy, which is very different, cannot.

The difference between uncertainty and indeterminacy is practically, as well as theoretically, indispensable. Though reticence is generally appropriate when one is uncertain, it is wholly out of place for anyone genuinely convinced that the issue is not uncertain but indeterminate. The Catholic Church has declared, for example, that even those who are uncertain whether a fetus is a person with a right to live should oppose abortion, because abortion would be so terrible if it turned out that a fetus is a person. No comparable argument could move someone who has convinced himself that it is indeterminate whether a fetus is a person: that no claim one way or the other is correct. He might of course have other reasons for taking a stance. He might say that because those who mistakenly think that a fetus is a person are very upset by abortion, it should be legally banned for that reason. Or that abortion should be legally permitted because it is unjust for the state to limit liberty without a positive case. But he lacks the reason for reticence or agony that someone who thinks the issue uncertain has.

Once we distinguish uncertainty from indeterminacy, we see that we need as strong a positive case for claims of indeterminacy as for more positive claims. How might I support my judgment that, of two famous wines, one is not better than another nor are they equal? Or that it is a mistake to claim that either Beethoven or Picasso was the greater artist or Budge or Beckham the greater athlete? I need a positive theory about greatness in wine or art or sports. I assume that you, like me, are willing and think yourself able to make at least some comparisons of artistic merit: we think Picasso a greater painter than Balthus and also, though the case is closer, a greater painter than Braque. We also think Beethoven a greater composer than Lloyd-Webber. So we believe that comparisons about the merits of particular artists are in principle sensible.

I think, as I just said, that though Braque was a very important artist, all things considered Picasso was a greater one. If you challenge me, I will try to sustain that opinion in various ways—by pointing to Picasso’s greater originality, inventiveness, and range of qualities from playfulness to profundity, while nevertheless admitting certain advantages in Braque’s work: a more lyrical approach to cubism, for example. Because artistic merit is a complex subject and my claim is an all-things-considered one, the issue can tolerate a complex discussion. The conversation would not soon turn silly, as I think it would if I were trying to defend a claim about the greater nobility of Petrus over Lafite. I might or might not convince you, after sustained discussion, that I am right about Picasso and Braque; you might or might not convince me that I am wrong. But if neither convinces the other, I will continue in my opinion, as no doubt you will in yours. I might be disappointed if I could not convince you, but of course I would not count that fact as refuting my view.

But if I were asked whether Picasso was a greater genius than Beethoven, my answer would be very different. I would deny both that one was greater than the other and that they were exactly equal in merit. Picasso and Beethoven were both very great artists, I would say, and no exact comparison can be made between the two. Of course I must defend the distinction I have now drawn. Why can I rank Picasso and Braque but not Picasso and Beethoven? The difference is not that people agree about standards for comparing artists in the same period or in the same genre. They do not, and it would not follow that the agreed-upon standards were the right ones even if they did. The difference cannot be based on any cultural or social fact of that sort, but must be based, if it makes sense at all, on more general, perhaps even quite theoretical, assumptions about the character of artistic achievement or evaluation. I would try to defend my judgment about Picasso and Beethoven in that way. I believe that artistic achievement is a matter of response to artistic challenge and tradition, and that comparisons can therefore be more finely drawn within a genre than across them and more finely drawn between artists within a particular period of development of the same genre than between those who worked in the same genre though at very different times. So though I do think that Shakespeare was a greater creative artist than Jasper Johns, and Picasso a greater one than Vivaldi, I believe no precise ranking makes sense among evident geniuses at the very highest levels of different genres. This is not an evidently stable view, and I might well change my mind. But it is the view I now hold. I am certain that your own view, if you were to make it articulate, would be rather, or perhaps very, different.➄

Now consider indeterminacy claims in the more consequential domain of ethics. People are sometimes faced with important life-shaping decisions, and they then wonder about the value of different kinds of lives they might lead. A young woman must choose whether to pursue a promising career as a public-interest lawyer in Los Angeles or to emigrate to a kibbutz in Israel. (Of course, she will have many other options as well. But suppose these are the only two now in question.) She might be puzzled about a great deal. Which life would she find day-to-day more fun? More satisfying in retrospect? In which role would she be more successful? In which would she help others more? She might be uncertain about the right answers to any of these questions taken separately, and she will very likely be uncertain about the right answer to the further question how to weigh her answers against one another. It is a very popular view that she faces not uncertainty but indeterminacy, because, since these are both rewarding lives, there is no right answer to what life would be better or to which choice she should make.➅ She must just choose. That view might be correct. But it is not correct by default. It needs as much or as little positive argument as the contrary claim that the best life, all things considered, really lies in emigration. No such argument is supplied only by citing the obvious fact that there are many values and that they cannot all be realized in a single life. For the question remains—as a challenging abstract issue for philosophers and an agonizing practical one for people—which choice is nevertheless best?

There is no more question of a default here than in the exotic comparison of wines or athletes or artists. I have some sense of how the indeterminacy claim might be defended in those less important cases. My discussion, later in the book, of the ethical challenge we all face in leading our lives might suggest some possible arguments for indeterminacy in the ethical case. The adverbial value of a particular way of leading a life depends, among other things, on the way that life connects with other kinds of value, and someone might have positive reasons to believe that the kind of value created in a kibbutz life is incommensurate with the value created through work in American poverty law. If so, these reasons are indistinct.

In any case it would seem at best premature to suppose that positive arguments for indeterminacy are always available when people are deeply uncertain about what lives would be best for them to lead, and it is therefore puzzling that philosophers who declare broad ethical indeterminacy offer so few arguments for the transition from uncertainty to indeterminacy. Few people faced with important career or other life decisions have taken that comforting step themselves. We face life-changing decisions with a variety of emotions—uncertainty, of course, but also foreboding, weariness, and a fearsome sense that though we do not know how to decide, it nevertheless and greatly matters how we do decide. That set of thoughts is for many people a terrible burden. If they are making a mistake—if there really is no right answer to the question they ask—it would be enormously helpful if the philosophers of indeterminacy were to explain why.

Now consider the popular claim, at least among academic lawyers, that there is often no right answer to a difficult legal question.➆ This cannot be true by default in law any more than in ethics. The no-right-answer claim is a legal claim—it insists that no argument exists that makes the case for one side stronger—and it must therefore rest on some theory or conception of law. Some theories of law do claim to support that conclusion: the cruder versions of legal positivism do, because according to those theories only past decisions of officials provide legal reasons and there might well be no past official decision on either side of an issue. There are more complex and plausible legal theories that might also be thought to generate indeterminacy in certain cases. So law nicely illustrates the point that claims of indeterminacy, unlike confessions of uncertainty, require a positive theory. In my view it also illustrates the difficulty of producing such a theory: the crude legal positivism that sustains no-right-answer verdicts appeals to very few thoughtful practicing lawyers. In any case, however, many contemporary legal scholars who claim to find it self-evident that there is no right answer to controversial legal questions do not subscribe to legal positivism or to any other theory that offers positive legal arguments for indeterminacy.➇ They just fall into the fallacy of supposing that indeterminacy holds by default.

Finally we come to the moral case. We are not, remember, now discussing cases of alleged moral conflict. We are considering the claim that the case for prohibiting abortion is no stronger and no weaker than the case for permitting it, even though the two cases are not of equal strength. How can that strong claim be defended? Commentators often say that someone’s view about abortion depends on whether he finds one analogy—that abortion is like murder—stronger than the competing analogy that compares abortion to appendectomy. That is an innocuous observation. But many of them add, as if this were self-evident, that neither of the two analogies is stronger than the other. How could that further claim be defended? What would it take to show, a priori, that no matter how thoroughly and imaginatively the dozens of complex issues at stake are canvassed, no case can be constructed that will show, even if only marginally and controversially, that one side or the other has the better of the overall argument? In the easier cases we considered, about the comparison of wines, artists, and athletes, it seemed plausible that the right theory of aesthetic or athletic excellence might well provide grounds for limiting the range of sensible judgment so as to show why, for instance, trying to rank Picasso and Beethoven is silly. But it hardly seems obvious that the right account of morality could do that. On the contrary, it seems antecedently unlikely that a plausible view of the point of morality could teach us that debates about the permissibility of abortion are silly.

Hardheaded people like to ridicule—as woolly or dogmatic—the claims of other people who believe that one position in some deep and apparently intractable controversy really has the better of the argument. Critics say that these partisans overlook the obvious truth that there is no “fact of the matter,” no “single right answer” to the issue in play. The critics do not pause to consider whether they themselves have any substantive arguments for their equally substantive position, and, if they do, whether these might not also be ridiculed as vague or unpersuasive or as resting on instincts or even bare assertions in the same way. Absolute confidence or clarity is the privilege of fools and fanatics. The rest of us must do the best we can: we must choose among all the substantive views on offer by asking which strikes us, after reflection and due thought, as more plausible than the others. And if none does, we must then settle for the true default view, which is not indeterminacy but uncertainty. I repeat my earlier caution. I mean to challenge only one form of internal skepticism about ethics and morality. I have said nothing yet about the internal skepticism that finds us alone at night when we can almost touch our own death, the terrifying sense that nothing matters. Argument can’t help then; we can only wait for dawn.

===============================================================================
p.449

➀ I mainly do not distinguish between indeterminacy and incommensurability. I treat the former as including the latter.

➁ This helpful term was proposed by Ruth Chang. See her introduction to the collection of essays Incommensurability, Incomparability, and Practical Reason, ed. Ruth Chang (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1997).

➂ District of Columbia, et al. v. Dick Anthony Heller, 128 S. Ct. 2783 (2008).

➃ See the discussion of moral conflict in Thomas Nagel, “War and Massacre,” Philosophy & Public Affairs 1, no. 2 (1972): 123–44.

➄ Leo Katz, for example, believes, as I do, that most claims of indeterminacy are really examples of ignorance. But he includes in that judgment, as I do not, all claims that two artists in different genres are “on a par” with one another. See Katz, “Incommensurable Choices and the Problem of Moral Ignorance,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review 146, no. 5 (June 1998): 1465–85.

➅ Joseph Raz, “Incommensurability,” in The Morality of Freedom (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986), 321–66.

➆ See Martha Minow and Joseph William Singer, “In Favor of Foxes: Pluralism as Fact and Aid to the Pursuit of Justice,” in Symposium: Justice for Hedgehogs: A Conference on Ronald Dworkin’s Forthcoming Book (special issue), Boston University Law Review 90, no. 2 (April 2010): 903; Ronald Dworkin, Law’s Empire (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1986), 10.

➇ For a fuller exposition of the argument of this paragraph, see “No Right Answer?” in my book A Matter of Principle (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1985).

===============================================================================

Key concepts:

adverbial value (88)
default (90)
on a par (89)
indeterminacy (89, 90)
performance (88)
uncertainty (91)