6 Moral Responsibility (99)

Responsibility and Interpretation

Agenda

To recapitulate: Morality is an independent domain of thought. Hume’s principle—itself a moral principle—is sound: any argument that either supports or undermines a moral claim must include or presuppose further moral claims or assumptions. The only sensible form of moral skepticism is therefore an internal skepticism that depends on rather than challenges the truth-seeking character of moral conviction. The only sensible argument for the “realist” view that some moral claims are objectively true is therefore a substantive moral argument that some particular moral claim—that tax cheating is wrong, say—is true and would still be true even if no one ever disapproved of cheating on taxes. If we think that our reasons for accepting any such moral claim are good ones, then we must also think that we are “in touch with” the truth of the matter, and that its truth is no accident.

Some readers may find in this declaration of independence only a deeper form of skepticism; skepticism so deep that it is skeptical even about skepticism. But there is no skepticism here, even about skepticism. The independence thesis leaves you free to conclude (if that is what seems right to you) that no one ever has any moral duties or responsibilities at all. What could be a deeper form of skepticism than that? Would you be better off—intellectually or in any other way—if you were able to reach that dramatically skeptical conclusion through an Archimedean piece of metaphysics or sociology rather than through a moral argument? Would you be better off if you could reach the opposite conclusion, that people do indeed have moral duties, through an Archimedean Platonism of morons? You might think: “Yes, because I could then be more confident of my convictions than I am now.” But you could not, because you would have to decide—through ordinary moral argument alone—which of your convictions were true in order to know which were made true by morons.

These are important conclusions; we have established, I think, that the ordinary view makes sense and that external critics of that view do not. But nothing more. Our limited conclusion will come as no surprise to nonphilosophers. What worries them is not whether moral claims can be true but which moral claims are true; not whether we can, but whether we do, have good reason to think as we do. Many people and some philosophers who press that question hope to find a litmus stick: a test for good moral argument that does not beg the question it tries to answer by already presupposing some controversial moral theory. If the argument of this book so far is sound, that is not a reasonable hope. Our moral epistemology—our account of good reasoning about moral matters—must be an integrated rather than an Archimedean epistemology, and it must therefore be itself a substantive, first-order moral theory.

We are always guilty of a kind of circularity. There is no way I can test the accuracy of my moral convictions except by deploying further moral convictions. My reasons for thinking that tax cheating is wrong are good reasons if the arguments I rely on are good ones. That is too crude an account of the difficulty: we hope that the circle of our opinions has a wider radius than that. But if I am faced with someone who holds moral opinions radically different from my own, I cannot count on finding anything in my set of reasons and arguments that he would be irrational not to accept. I cannot demonstrate to him that my opinions are true and his false.

But I can hope to convince him—and myself—of something else that is often more important: that I have acted responsibly in reaching my opinions and acting on them. The distinction between accuracy and responsibility in moral conviction is a further dimension of what I called the ordinary view. I may be right about affirmative action when I flip a coin and wrong when I reflect carefully, but I am irresponsible in the first case and responsible in the second. The difference between accuracy and responsibility is readily apparent in the third person. I may judge that your convictions are seriously wrong but nevertheless accept that you acted with full responsibility in forming them. The difference is substantially eroded in the first person: I cannot think myself responsible in believing that abortion is wrong unless I do believe that abortion is wrong. But the two virtues are different even from that perspective: I might have greater confidence that abortion is wrong than that I have reached that conclusion on adequate reflection. Or the other way around: I may be satisfied that I have thought about the matter properly and yet remain tentative about the conclusion I have reached. Indeed, I may be satisfied that I have thought about the matter as well as I can and yet be wholly uncertain about what conclusion to draw.

We can best approach the crucial question of how to think about moral issues—the question of moral epistemology—by studying the ordinary concept of moral responsibility. In this chapter, and more broadly in this Part Two, I argue that the nerve of responsibility is integrity and that the epistemology of a morally responsible person is interpretive. It might be helpful to summarize my conclusions in advance. We all have unstudied moral convictions, almost from the beginning of our lives. These are mainly carried in concepts whose origin and development are issues for anthropologists and intellectual historians. We inherit these concepts from parents and culture and, possibly, to some degree through genetic species disposition. As young children we deploy mainly the idea of fairness, and then we acquire and deploy other, more sophisticated and pointed moral concepts: generosity, kindness, promise keeping, courage, rights, and duties.➀ Sometime later we add political concepts to our moral repertoire: we speak of law, liberty, and democratic ideals. We need much more detailed moral opinions when we actually confront a wide variety of moral challenges in family, social, commercial, and political life. We form these through interpretation of our abstract concepts that is mainly unreflective. We unreflectively interpret each in the light of the others. That is, interpretation knits values together. We are morally responsible to the degree that our various concrete interpretations achieve an overall integrity so that each supports the others in a network of value that we embrace authentically. To the extent that we fail in that interpretive project—and it seems impossible wholly to succeed—we are not acting fully out of conviction, and so we are not fully responsible.

That is the burden of this chapter. If its conclusions are sound, we need to ask new questions. What makes one interpretation of fairness or generosity or justice better than another? Does it make sense to suppose a best—or true—interpretation of a moral concept? In Chapter 7 I will approach these questions by setting them in a wider context. We study interpretation in general—not just in morality but also across a wide range of interpretive genres that includes literature, history, and law. I argue that the interpretive process—the process of seeking meaning in an event or achievement or institution—differs in important ways from scientific investigation. If so, and if my claim is right that moral reasoning is best understood as the interpretation of moral concepts, we do well to treat moral reasoning not as sui generis but as a special case of a much more general interpretive method.

In Chapter 8 we will return to morality but with a different focus. If moral reasoning is interpretive of moral concepts, we need better to understand not just the nature of interpretation but the nature of such concepts. I suggest that we treat certain concepts as special by designating them as interpretive concepts whose nature cannot be explicated except through normative argument. If so, then moral philosophy is itself an interpretive project. I end Part Two by offering the moral theories of Plato and Aristotle as classic examples of moral philosophy so understood.

Types of Responsibility

Responsibility is an indispensable concept across our intellectual life. It is a tricky concept because we use the words “responsibility” and “responsible” in so many different and easily confused ways. First, we must distinguish responsibility as a virtue from responsibility as a relation between people and events. We say, in the virtue sense, that someone behaved responsibly or irresponsibly in acting as he did on some occasion (he acted responsibly in refusing the offer), or that it is or is not characteristic of him to behave responsibly (he is, in general, a highly responsible, or irresponsible, person). We say, in the relational sense, that someone is or is not responsible for some event or consequence (he alone is responsible for the company’s turn into profit). We make further distinctions among types of responsibility in the first, virtue, sense: we distinguish intellectual, practical, ethical, and moral responsibility. A scientist who does not check his calculations lacks intellectual responsibility; a writer who does not back up his files lacks practical responsibility; someone who lives aimlessly lacks ethical responsibility; a voter who votes for a vice presidential candidate because he finds her sexy lacks moral responsibility. A political leader who sends a nation to war on plainly inadequate intelligence is irresponsible in all four ways.

We make a variety of distinctions within relational responsibility as well. A person is causally responsible for an event, we say, if some act of his figures (or figures substantially) in the best causal explanation of that event. I would be causally responsible for an injury to a blind beggar if I shoved him to steal his money or collided with him absentmindedly or while drunk or deranged or even just accidentally. But not when someone else has pushed me into him, because then no act of mine has contributed to the injury. (My body is part of the causal chain, but I am not.) Someone has assignment responsibility for some matter if it is his duty to attend to or look after it. The last person to leave a room, we say, is responsible for turning off the lights, and the sergeant is responsible for his platoon. Someone has liability responsibility for an event when he is required to repair, compensate for, or absorb any damage flowing from the event. I have liability responsibility for the damage I cause by my careless driving; an employer may have liability responsibility for any damage his employees cause. Causal, assignment, and liability responsibility are all, finally, to be distinguished from judgmental responsibility. Someone has judgmental responsibility for some act if it is appropriate to rank his act on some scale of praise or criticism. I have judgmental responsibility for walking past the beggar, giving him nothing, but not for the harm when someone else pushes me into him. These different senses of relational responsibility are conceptually independent: an employer may have liability responsibility for damage caused by his employees’ negligence even though he is neither causally nor judgmentally responsible for that damage.

In this chapter we consider moral responsibility as a virtue. We begin with one aspect of that virtue. Morally responsible people act in a principled rather than an unprincipled way; they act out of rather than in spite of their convictions.➁ What does that mean? I ignore, though only to postpone, a familiar problem. Any account of moral responsibility must at some point face what philosophers call the free will challenge. If every decision anyone makes is fully determined by prior events over which he has no control, if full knowledge of the state of the world before someone is born, together with full knowledge of the laws of nature, would enable a computer to predict every decision he makes throughout his life, then it might seem that moral responsibility is always only an illusion, that it makes no sense to distinguish acting out of conviction from acting for any other reason. Everyone thinks or does what he is fated to think or do, and that is the end of the matter. I face that challenge in Chapter 10. We can assess judgmental responsibility from two perspectives: from within the experiential lives people lead, taking at face value the fact, inescapable from that perspective, that people have fresh decisions to make, or from a more Archimedean scientific perspective that treats their experiential lives as only part of the data for which a causal explanation should be sought. I argue in that chapter that the first perspective is appropriate when judgmental responsibility is at issue, and I make that assumption for the balance of this chapter.

Morally Responsible Action (104)

Ways Not to Be Responsible

Count the ways in which someone might fail to act out of the principles he professes. The most obvious is crude insincerity. The leader who takes his country to war pretending to follow principles that in fact have no grip on him, principles that he has no intention of following when it is inconvenient for him to do so, is crudely insincere. He pays only lip service to the principles he offers as justification. Rationalization is a more complex phenomenon: someone rationalizes who genuinely believes that his conduct is governed by principles that in fact play no effective role in explaining what he actually decides to do. He votes for politicians who promise to end welfare programs and justifies his vote by telling himself that people should take responsibility for their own fates. But that principle plays no role in guiding his behavior on other occasions: when he appeals to the politicians he helped elect for a bailout for his industry, for example. His behavior is in fact determined by self-interest, not any principle that recognizes the importance of other people’s lives. His alleged commitment does not promise evenhandedness, because he will follow the principles he cites only when these serve his own interests.

There are many other ways in which moral responsibility can be compromised. Someone might hold faithfully to moral principles of great abstraction but yield to self-interest or to some other parallel influence in deciding how these abstract principles apply to concrete cases. He may think that preventative war is always immoral unless absolutely necessary, but he may not have reflected on what “necessary” means in this context: whether it means unless preventative war is essential to save a nation from annihilation, for example, or, perhaps at the other extreme, necessary to protect a nation from trade competition that would compromise its citizens’ standard of living. His conviction, vague though it is, may play a role in his decision whether to support a particular foreign policy. But it cannot play as full or consequential a role as a tighter principle or a principle supplemented by other pertinent convictions would do. The porosity of his principle allows some other part of his personal history—perhaps something as simple as his party affiliation—to play a more effective role in explaining his behavior than the abstract principle does.

Moral schizophrenia compromises responsibility in a still different way: someone feels himself committed to two contradictory principles and succumbs to whichever of the two comes into his mind at the moment, even when this is against his interests and more stable inclinations. He thinks, for example, both that people who have become rich deserve to keep what they have earned and that comfortable members of a community have a duty to help care for the neediest of their fellow citizens. He supports tax reductions when his mind is on the deserving rich but opposes them when his mind is on the wretched poor. He is morally irresponsible: his behavior is not evenhanded but arbitrary and whimsical.

Very few people are so evidently schizophrenic as that, but almost everyone contradicts himself in a more subtle way: through moral compartmentalization. We have convictions about Middle East politics, the proper justifications for war, permissible acts in war, self-defense on city streets, abortion, capital punishment, fair trials, how the local police should behave, the character and limits of personal responsibility for the consequences of one’s acts, a fair distribution of a community’s collective wealth, patriotism, loyalty to one’s friends and the limits of that loyalty, the nature of personal courage, and the importance of wealth, knowledge, experience, family, and achievement in making a life a good, successful life rather than a bad, wasted one. We have convictions about all these things, and our convictions may be locally sincere and effective. We may act out of these convictions on the occasions when each is directly relevant: when we ask ourselves whether the invasion of Iraq was immoral, for example, or whether taxes should be raised or lowered, or whether we should take up skiing. But when we step back we may find that the coherence of our convictions is only local, that the principles or ideals that govern one compartment are at war with, or anyway disconnected from, those that govern another.

The degree of potential conflict depends on how narrow our compartments are. I may have powerful convictions about the Iraq war, but if these do not match my convictions about other military incursions—in Kosovo or Bosnia, for example—then my views about Iraq are more likely to be explained by my dislike of the Bush administration or my party affiliation. The moral responsibility I show by voting out of my sincere conviction may be only skin deep. More subtle—and debatable—contradictions appear when we compare convictions across larger categories. We have instincts and convictions, I said, about the special loyalty we owe to family and friends and the limits of that loyalty. We may and should, as individuals, show greater concern for the well-being of family and friends than we show for strangers. But there are limits to that special concern: we may not subject strangers to risks of grave injury that we would not accept for ourselves or those close to us. Those are our moral convictions, but we may betray them in the political policies we support. We may think it right to subject foreigners to injuries and risks of injustice to which we would not expose our own citizens, as many Americans did in approving our treatment of the prisoners in Guantánamo Bay.

These possibly contradictory convictions cut across the boundary between personal and political convictions. Now consider convictions drawn from categories that seem even further separated—convictions about political and personal virtue, for instance. It is quite common just now to say that terrorist atrocities show the need for a new balance between liberty and security: that we must curtail the individual rights we normally respect in our criminal process in the interest of greater protection from the terrorist menace. But does that opinion match our convictions about the character and value of personal courage? Courage, we think, requires that we accept increased risks in order to respect principle.

Now notice convictions drawn from compartments yet further separated: political justice and personal standards. Suppose I embrace, self-consciously or by instinct, a roughly utilitarian account of distributive justice that makes justice depend on advancing some collective social goal like making the community richer or happier on balance. But I myself, in my personal ambitions and accounting, do not rate wealth or even happiness high: I might think that certain achievements are much more important than happiness in making a success of my life. Or suppose I insist on an egalitarian redistribution of a community’s wealth without regard to whether recipients are able and willing to work. I say that people’s industry and dispositions for work are themselves created by social conditions and that it is therefore improper to deny someone a decent life just because he is lazy. But I adopt very different standards in criticizing myself: I struggle against sloth, and I blame myself when I fail to achieve what I set out to do.

Each of these various examples of apparent conflict or compartmentalization of principles is of course subject to reexamination. The conflict may be dissolved by further reflection or discussion. I may think, or decide after further thought, that the differences between the political situations in the Balkans and in Iraq justify my differing views about intervention in the two regions; that political officials have different and greater responsibilities to their citizens than we as individuals have to our own families; that courage is distinct from foolhardiness in a way that shows that our treatment of terrorist suspects is not cowardly; that a theory of justice may properly rest on assumptions about well-being and responsibility that those who embrace the theory would not accept in their private lives. If I do think so, or decide so after reflection, then my moral personality is more complex and has greater unity than at first appeared. But this is hardly inevitable: it might be that further reflection would instead reveal my inability to unify my apparently conflicting convictions through distinguishing principles that I could also claim wholeheartedly to accept. If so, then I have discovered a further shortfall in my moral responsibility. It is not deep conviction but something else—self-interest, perhaps, or conformity or just intellectual laziness—that best explains how I treat other people in at least some circumstances, and I therefore deny them the respect that moral responsibility is meant to provide. I do not, after all, treat others in a principled way.

Filters

We can summarize these various threats to responsibility in a metaphor. Imagine that your effective moral convictions—convictions that exert some control over what you do—bind together as a filter surrounding your decision-making will. Insincere convictions and rationalizations are not effective convictions and so have no place in that filter, but abstract, contradictory, and compartmentalized convictions are and do. Your personal history explains, let us assume, which effective convictions are part of that filter: they explain why you have developed those convictions rather than the different convictions that other people with different personal histories have developed. Personal history also explains the great variety of other inclinations and attitudes you have—emotions, preferences, tastes, and prejudices—that might also influence your decisions. Moral responsibility requires that these other influences pass through the filter of effective convictions so that they are censored and shaped by those convictions, as light passed through a filter is censored and shaped.

Insincere convictions and rationalizations, as I just said, can play no part in that filter. Porous effective convictions play some role, but because they are porous their protection is incomplete. If I believe only that preventative war is wrong unless it is necessary, and have no more detailed convictions about what necessity means in this context, then my decision whether to support or oppose a war may reflect unfiltered personal history like party affiliation or political ambition. Flatly contradictory convictions, like the opinions that the rich are entitled to keep what they have earned and that the community is obliged to do what is necessary to help the poor, provide almost no filter even when each is sincerely held, because the choice between them, on any particular occasion, will be determined not by principle but by other, unfiltered influences. Convictions whose inconsistency is hidden in compartmentalization are also in effective filters, even though they are not nakedly capricious in that way, because compartmentalization allows unfiltered influences decisively to define and distinguish departments. Inconsistency across departments of moral personality shows inattention, rather than genuine respect and concern for others, and permits what further examination shows to be arbitrary difference rather than principled distinctions.

Our moral responsibility requires us to try to make our reflective convictions into as dense and effective a filter as we can and in that way to claim as much force as possible for conviction within the more general causal matrix of our personal history as a whole. This requires that we seek a thorough coherence of value among our convictions. It also requires that we seek authenticity in the convictions that cohere: we must find convictions that grip us strongly enough to play the role of filters when we are pressed by competing motives that also flow from our personal histories. Our convictions are initially unformed, compartmentalized, abstract, and therefore porous. Responsibility requires us critically to interpret the convictions that seem initially most appealing or natural—to seek understandings and specifications of these initially appealing convictions with those two goals of integrity and authenticity in mind. We interpret each of these convictions, so far as we can, in the light of the others and also in the light of what feels natural to us as a suitable way to live our lives. In that way we aim both to expand and thicken the effective filter. Much of the rest of this book is an illustration of how we might pursue that responsibility project.

Responsibility and Philosophy

I mean to describe how the mental life of a fully responsible person could be pictured, not the moral phenomenology of a responsible person. It must be plain by now, however, that the goal of responsibility would be impossible to achieve fully, even if we set out self-consciously to achieve it. We cannot hope to construct a dense, detailed, interwoven, wholly coherent filter of conviction wrapped around our will that is effective without exception and that brings us a constant glow of fittingness. That would be the achievement of Kant’s man of perfectly good will, and no one is that intelligent, imaginative, and good. So we must treat moral responsibility as a work always in progress: someone is responsible who accepts moral integrity and authenticity as appropriate ideals and deploys a reasonable effort toward achieving them. In principle this must be an individual effort, not only because each person’s initial convictions are somewhat different from everyone else’s, but because only the person whose settled convictions they become can gauge their authenticity for him. But it would be absurd to expect everyone to engage in the kind of philosophical reflection that any full-blown attempt at moral responsibility would demand. So moral interpretation, like so much else of high importance, is a matter for social formation and also for division of labor.

As I emphasize in later chapters, a community’s language and culture, and the occasions these present for conversational exploration and collective thought, play an inevitable and indispensable role in anyone’s search for his own responsibility. Moral and political philosophers have their own role to play in that culture. It falls to them—though not only to them—to try to construct self-conscious articulate systems of value and principle out of widely shared but disparate moral inclinations, reactions, ambitions, and traditions. They must try to establish connections and to winnow out inconsistencies across familiar families and departments of morality and ethics, making theory at once more abstract and detailed, broader and more widely integrated. In that way a school or group of philosophers who share roughly similar general moral attitudes might hope together to provide a template of what responsibility requires for people with those general attitudes: a template of liberal responsibility, for example. Such templates are valuable to other people who are reflective and well disposed to moral responsibility, either because they already hold the same general values or because they find those values newly attractive when presented in that integrated way. Even those who reject a particular philosophical template can nevertheless discover in its structures what moral responsibility would require for them out of their different convictions.

In that way moral philosophy can influence people; it can make them more responsible as individuals. Village-idiot skeptics mock what they take to be philosophy’s pretensions: they say that a moral philosopher never converts anyone who begins with a different moral instinct or education. That claim is as silly as the opposite claim that every philosopher invariably convinces anyone who listens to him. No doubt the truth lies somewhere in between, and it would take a pointlessly grand empirical program even to give us some idea where in between it lies. But the role we are now imagining for philosophy is anyway immune from the complaint, because that role makes no claims about radical conversion. Indeed, philosophy would have an important role to play on this account even if, as seems unbelievable, it actually never dramatically changed anyone’s opinion or behavior. For a community or a culture has moral responsibilities of its own: its collective arrangements must show a disposition toward realizing that responsibility. Whatever the Athenians thought, history has made Socrates an ornament to Athens.

Indeed, it is easier to understand philosophy’s ambitions, and test its achievements, on the space of responsibility than that of truth. Kant’s moral philosophy, for example, is best understood in those terms. As John Rawls emphasized in his lectures on Kant, that philosopher did not suppose himself to have discovered fresh truths about moral duties.➂ His various formulations of the categorical imperative were in the spirit of the responsibility project I described. Being able to universalize the maxim of our conduct is hardly a test of truth; different agents will produce different schemes responding to that requirement. But it is a test of responsibility, or at least an important part of such a test, because it provides the coherence that responsibility asks. It also tests the authenticity that responsibility demands: Kant said we must be able to will as well as imagine the universality of a maxim. Politics is for most people among their most important moral theaters and challenges. So a community’s political philosophy is a major part of its conscience and claim to collective moral responsibility.

These last few paragraphs might be open to a misunderstanding I have been helpfully warned to avoid.➃ I do not suggest what is patently false: that moral philosophers have a more accurate moral sense than ordinary people do. The philosopher’s assignment is more explicit, but his concrete judgments are not necessarily more sensitive. Nor is ordinary moral judgment innocent of philosophy: people’s opinions about good and bad, right and wrong, reflect a generally intuitive sense of how a host of more concrete moral concepts relate to one another. In Chapter 8 I try to explain why it is difficult to account for moral agreement or disagreement on any other assumption.

The Value of Responsibility

Responsibility so understood is impossible to achieve fully. But why does responsibility matter? Of course it matters to us individually. Anyone who cares about acting as he should must aim to act coherently out of principle. But why do we care that others act responsibly? We care about what they do: we want them to act properly. But why should we care, independently, whether they act out of conviction or for some other reason? Consider two imaginary leaders of democracies, both of whom bring their nations into war in the Middle East. Each says that he acts to free an oppressed people from a savage dictator. One is sincere: he believes that powerful nations have a duty to liberate oppressed people, and he would not have committed his nation to war had he not thought the population oppressed. The second is insincere: he goes to war because he thinks it important that his nation have greater control over the oil resources of the region. His appeal to a moral duty is only window dressing: if the nation he attacks had not been oppressed by a dictator, he would have invented some other excuse. (These descriptions are so crude that I need not add that I have no actual politicians in mind.) One, we say, has acted responsibly, even if wrongly; the other has not acted responsibly, and we despise him. Why is the difference so important?

It might be tempting to think that people who follow some principle rigorously, rather than acting on impulse or for their own narrow advantage, are more likely to do what is in fact the right thing. But that assumption is not justified: there are more mistaken convictions than sound ones. Indeed, people who act out of mistaken principle are sometimes more dangerous than those who only feign principle: the latter act wrongly only when this is to their advantage and hence can more easily be deterred by fear of political retribution or criminal prosecution. Why do we nevertheless praise sincerity as valuable for its own sake? We cannot say that when sincere people are in the right they are guided by moral truth, while insincere people can be right only by accident. We have rejected the causal impact hypothesis: even sincere people’s convictions never stand causally downstream of moral truth.

The sincere leader’s behavior, let us for now assume, is caused by his beliefs about the moral duty of powerful nations. No moral conviction figures in any causal explanation of the insincere leader’s behavior. But even if we grant this, the causal role of conviction cannot be exhaustive or even particularly deep. We can explain why the sincere leader invaded by citing his conviction. But we must then ask why he came to have that conviction rather than the different convictions many other people have, and our answer to that question will end in the expanded personal history I described, or in some supposition about what we would find if we knew that history in more refined detail. If we go far enough back in the causal chain, that is, we find that culture, education, genes, and even perhaps self-interest play much the same role, finally, in explaining the behavior of sincere and insincere people. If the sincere leader had been educated in a different culture or family, or perhaps if his genes were differently arranged, he might well have thought that powerful nations have a duty not to intervene in the affairs of other people, even to save them from a savage dictatorship. So the behaviors of the sincere and the hypocritical leaders have a parallel deep causal origin. Why is it so important that in one case the causal route runs, toward the end, through a filter of conviction, while in the other it does not?

In Chapter 7 I will propose a connection between morality and ethics. In brief: we try to act out of moral conviction in our dealings with other people because that is what our own self-respect requires. It requires this because we cannot consistently treat our own lives as objectively important unless we accept that everyone’s life has the same objective importance. We can—and do—expect others to accept that fundamental principle of humanity. It is, we think, the basis of civilization. But we know that many other people draw very different conclusions from ours about what further moral convictions the principle entails. In Parts Four and Five I defend a detailed view of its implications, but that view is and will remain controversial. Only a minority of Americans now accept, for instance, that the fundamental principle requires even a roughly equal distribution of a political community’s wealth. Community and civility nevertheless require a high level of tolerance: we cannot treat everyone who disagrees with us as a moral outlaw. We must respect the contrary opinions of those who accept the equal importance of all human lives but who disagree with us, in good faith, about what that means in practice. We must respect them, however, only so far as they accept the burden of responsibility we have canvassed in this chapter, because only then do they really accept that equal importance. Only then do they try to act consistently with what they take, rightly or wrongly, to be its demands.

The most vulnerable members of any community are likely to benefit most by our treating responsibility as a distinct virtue and requirement, because they are most likely to suffer when people do not give everyone the advantage of principles they generally endorse. But everyone benefits in a more diffuse way by living in a community that, by insisting on responsibility, signals a basic shared respect even in the face of moral diversity. These benefits are particularly important in politics, because politics are coercive and the stakes are invariably high and often mortal. No one can sensibly expect that his officials will act always out of principles that he himself thinks right, but he can expect his officials to act out of the principles they themselves endorse. We feel cheated when we suspect corruption, political self-interest, bias, favoritism, or whimsy. We feel cheated of what those in power owe those subject to that power: responsibility that expresses equal concern for all. Nothing in these social and political values of responsibility is undermined by the further assumption I said might seem to threaten moral responsibility: that even sincere people’s convictions are causally explained not by encounters with truth but by a varied and contingent personal history.

Responsibility and Truth (113)

Evidence, Case, and Ground

Morally responsible people may not achieve truth, but they seek it. It might seem, however, that the interpretive account of responsibility compromises that search. Responsibility seeks coherence and integration. But the truth about morality, some philosophers think, is crowded with conflict and compromise: moral values are plural and incommensurate. So insisting on coherence, they say, blinds us to obdurate conflict that is really just there.➄

Is responsibility therefore misconceived? I began this chapter by distinguishing responsibility from truth. Now we must consider how these two virtues are connected. In Chapter 4, in the course of an argument against the causal impact hypothesis, I used a philosopher’s term: I said that moral properties “supervene” on ordinary properties. I must now say more about what that means and entails. Judgments about the physical and mental world can be barely true in the following sense. We can imagine another world that is now exactly like ours in every detail of its present composition save one: in place of the black pen on your desk in this world, on the otherwise identical desk of a person otherwise identical to you in that other world, the pen is blue. Nothing else need now be different in the two worlds in consequence of which those pens, otherwise exactly alike, are of different colors. Physical facts like that one can stand alone: that is what it means to say that they can be barely true.

That is not the case with moral and other value judgments, however. They cannot be barely true; if two worlds differ in some value they must differ in some other, nonevaluative, way as well. There cannot be another world just like this one except that in that world The Marriage of Figaro is trash or that in that world it is morally permissible to torture babies for fun. That would indeed be possible if value judgment were a matter of perceiving value particles. Then it would make perfect sense to suppose that moral judgments can be barely true: that they could be true in one world but false in another one otherwise exactly alike if morons were configured differently in the two worlds. But there are no moral particles or anything else whose bare existence can make a value judgment true. Values are not like rocks that we might stumble across in the dark. They are not just stubbornly there.

When a value judgment is true, there must be a reason why it is true. It can’t be just true. That is not necessarily the case in science. Our scientists aim to find the most fundamental and embracing laws of physics, biology, and psychology that they can. But we must accept the possibility—or in any case the sense of the idea—that at some point in the scarcely imaginable future the possibility of further explanation will give out: that at some point it would be correct to say, “That’s just the way things are.” We may say this too early or with only error in hand. Scientists may one day find the comprehensive principles they seek: a principle of physics, perhaps, that explains everything physical and encapsulates biology and psychology as well. Or their search for unifying principles may turn out to be misconceived. The universe might be finally untidy: as Einstein put it, God might have missed an opportunity for elegance. There may be a way the world had to be. Or perhaps not; perhaps it might have been different. All that remains to be seen—or not, depending on the survival and improvement of intelligent creatures.

In any case it makes sense to think there is a way the world just is and therefore a theoretical end to explanation. In his lectures on quantum electrodynamics to a general audience, the physicist Richard Feynman said, “The next reason that you might think you do not understand what I am telling you is, while I am describing to you how Nature works, you won’t understand why Nature works that way. But you see, nobody understands that. I can’t explain why Nature behaves in this peculiar way … So I hope you can accept Nature as She is—absurd.”➅

Can you imagine a moral philosopher speaking that way? “I will tell you how morality works—progressive income taxes are wicked—but no one can understand why they are wicked. You must understand Morality as She is—absurd.” It is always appropriate to ask why morality requires what we say it does, and never appropriate to say: it just does. Very often, of course, we cannot say much more than that. We might say: “Torture just is wrong, and that’s all there is to it.” But this is only impatience or lack of imagination: it expresses not responsibility but its opposite.

True, single-minded philosophers sometimes offer their moral opinions in the form of an axiomatic system: some utilitarians say, for instance, that all our obligations flow from a most basic obligation to do whatever will produce the greatest surplus of pleasure over pain in the long run. But when other philosophers make trouble by producing apparent counterexamples—by pointing out, for instance, that this supposed basic obligation might require inflicting intense torture on one or a few innocent people to avoid a tiny inconvenience to billions of others—those utilitarians try to find reasons why their principle would not have that consequence.➆ Or they try to modify it so that it would not, or they argue that adhering to their principle even when it has such unappealing consequences is nevertheless justified for some other reason: in order to respect the equal importance of all human lives, for example. They do not say: “It is too bad that our principle has such consequences but that is how the cookie crumbles. Our principle is just, as it happens, true.” We would be appalled if they did: it makes sense to ask for support even for a very abstract moral principle, and in some circumstances it would be irresponsible not to try to provide one. Once again, philosophers’ habit of claiming “intuitions” might mislead us. In its innocent use, the claim is only a statement of conviction. It might also suggest an inability to provide a further reason for that conviction. But it should not be meant or understood to deny the possibility of a further reason.

Here is the same point through a different distinction. In the formal and informal sciences we seek evidence for propositions, and in the domain of value we make a case for propositions. Evidence signals the likelihood—perhaps the extreme likelihood—of a further fact. But it does not help to constitute that further fact or make it true. The further fact it signals is entirely independent: it is genuinely another fact. If there is water on some planet in a distant galaxy, then the proposition that there is water there is true. What makes it true—what supplies, we might say, the ground of its truth—is the water there. We may well have evidence of its truth, in the form of spectrographic data, but it would be a silly mistake to think that that evidence made the proposition true.

We cannot, however, make the same distinction in the case of moral judgment. Suppose we think that America’s invasion of Iraq was immoral and we offer, as part of our case, that the Bush administration was culpably negligent in relying on faulty intelligence. If we are right, the administration’s negligence is not evidence of some further, independent fact of immorality that we might establish in some other way. It is part of what makes the war immoral. The distinction is easy to illustrate in law. When the prosecutor shows the jury fingerprints, he is introducing evidence that the accused was at the scene. When he cites a precedent to show that the law does not recognize a particular defense, he is making a case for that conclusion. The precedent is not evidence of a further and independent legal fact. If the prosecutor’s case is sound, the precedent he cites helps to make his claim true.

The first distinction I drew explains the second. Because value judgments cannot be barely true, they can be true only in virtue of a case. The judgment that the law does not permit a particular defense, or that invading Iraq was immoral, can be true only if there is an adequate case in law or morals that supports it. Given Hume’s principle, that case must contain further value judgments—about the right understanding of the doctrine of precedent or about the responsibilities of political officials. None of those further value judgments can be barely true either. They can be true only if a further case can be made supporting each of them, and that further case will ramify into a host of other judgments about law and blame that cannot themselves be barely true but need yet further cases to show them true if they are true. How can this process of justification come to an end? Any actual person’s attempt to justify a moral judgment will of course come to an end soon, no matter how energetic and conscientious he is, in exhaustion or lack of time or imagination. He can then say no more than that he “sees” its truth. But when must a moral justification end because there is no more to say? It cannot end in the discovery of some master fundamental principle that is itself barely true, in some foundational statement about how things just are. There are no moral particles, and so there is no such principle.

The best we can say is: the argument ends when it meets itself, if it ever does. We can elaborate the metaphor I used earlier. If you organized all your moral convictions into an ideally effective filter encapsulating your will, they would form a large interconnected and interdependent system of principles and ideas. You could defend any part of that network only by citing some other part, until you had somehow managed to justify all parts in terms of the rest. Justifying your condemnation of the Iraq war might in that way include, at some point in an extraordinarily extended account, appealing to principles about negligence in personal matters, trustworthiness as a virtue, and caginess as a vice, and then to further principles purportedly justifying each of these convictions, and so on nearly forever. The truth of any true moral judgment consists in the truth of an indefinite number of other moral judgments. And its truth provides part of what constitutes the truth of any of those others. There is no hierarchy of moral principles built on axiomatic foundations; we rule that out when we dismiss morons from our ontology.

How vast a vast network of conviction should we imagine? Morality is only one department of value, only one dimension of conviction about what ought to be. We also have convictions about what is beautiful, for instance, and what it is to live well. Morality itself has departments: we distinguish personal from political morality and the morality of obligation, right and wrong from the morality of virtue and vice. Is there any limit to the range of convictions to which we might appeal in making a case that some action is morally right or morally wrong? Or that someone is virtuous or vicious, or that something is beautiful or ugly, or that some life is successful or unsuccessful? Could a case for the unfairness of affirmative action include an aesthetic judgment as well as a moral one? Could a case for the right way to live include claims about the natural evolution of the universe or about the biological heritage of animals in human beings?➇ I see no conceptual or a priori reason why not. What can count as an argument for a moral conviction is a substantive matter: we must wait to see what connections among different departments of value seem pertinent and appealing.

Conflicts in Value?

But might we not discover conflict as well as coherence in our constructions? Some distinctions are necessary. We must distinguish, first, values from desiderata. Values have judgmental force. We ought to be honest and not cruel, and we have behaved badly if we are cruel or dishonest. Desiderata, on the contrary, are what we want but do no wrong not to have. Or not to have as much of as we might. Desiderata almost always conflict: I like lemonade and lemon tart, but I have only one lemon. A community wants the highest level of security, the best educational system, the most efficient transport network, and the best available health care. But its budget is tight.

The serious and important question is whether values conflict with one another. Values often conflict with desiderata. Some steps we might take to improve safety from terrorists, which we certainly desire, would compromise liberty or honor. Some apparent conflicts of that sort may dissolve on further study. We may find that a better understanding of liberty shows that the measures that improve security do not compromise liberty after all. But sometimes further study reinforces the conflict: a nation’s honor is indeed sacrificed when alleged terrorists are tortured. There is no moral conflict in such cases, however, because morality requires that we give up whatever security our dishonor would achieve.

Moral conflict—conflict between two values—is our worry now. Richard Fallon describes an awkward situation.➈ A colleague asks you to comment on a draft of his book, and you find it bad. You will be cruel if you are frank but dishonest if you are not. Two questions arise. First, does it follow that there is no right answer to the question what you should do? That the case for honesty is neither stronger nor weaker than the case for kindness in these circumstances? Second, even if there is a right answer to that question, must you necessarily have compromised some moral value whatever you do? Does doing the right thing in such circumstances, all things considered, mean nevertheless doing something bad? Do kindness and honesty really conflict?

The first question raises the issues of Chapter 5. I urged the importance of distinguishing uncertainty from indeterminacy, and that distinction is essential here. Of course you might be uncertain whether it is better—or perhaps less bad—to be cruel or dishonest in these circumstances. But I cannot imagine what ground you could have for the alternate conclusion that neither would be better. There are no bare moral facts: moral reasoning, as I said, means drawing on a nested series of convictions about value, each of which could in turn draw on still other such convictions. What ground could you have for thinking that you would never see a reason, no matter how long you wrestled with the issue, why one choice of conflicting values in one set of circumstances is morally preferable to the other choice? What ground could you have for the even more ambitious hypothesis that there is no such reason to discover?

Turn to the second question. Is there really a conflict here at all? Do honesty and kindness really conflict, even from time to time? If I am to sustain my main claims in this book, about the unity of value, I must deny the conflict. For my claim is not just that we can bring our discrete moral judgments into some kind of reflective equilibrium—we could do that even if we conceded that our values conflict, by adopting some priorities for values or some set of principles for adjudicating conflicts in particular cases. I want to defend the more ambitious claim that there are no genuine conflicts in value that need such adjudication. It is, I agree, natural to say in a case like Fallon’s that we are torn between kindness and honesty. We might disagree, however, as to why it seems natural.

Here is one story. Moral responsibility is never complete: we are constantly reinterpreting our concepts as we use them. We must put them to work day by day even though we have not yet refined them fully to achieve the integration we seek. Our working understanding of the concepts of cruelty and dishonesty is good enough for most cases: it allows us comfortably to identify and, with a good will, avoid both vices. But sometimes, as in this case, that working understanding seems to pull us in opposite directions. We can do no better at this stage than to admit this by reporting an apparent conflict. It doesn’t follow that the conflict is deep and genuine, however. Just now I distinguished two questions. What is the right thing to do? Is the apparent conflict real? These questions cannot be so independent as my distinction suggested. The first question requires us to think further, and the way we think further is to further refine our conceptions of the two values. We ask whether it is really cruel to tell an author the truth. Or whether it is really dishonest to tell him what it is in his interests to hear and no one’s interests to suppress. However we describe the process of thought through which we decide what to do, these are the questions that, in substance, we face. We reinterpret our concepts to resolve our dilemma: the direction of our thought is toward unity, not fragmentation. However we decide, we have taken a step toward a more integrated understanding of our moral responsibilities.

On this story, apparent conflict is inevitable but, we can hope, only illusory and temporary. We confront it at retail, case by case, but we confront it through a conceptual rearrangement that works toward eliminating it. What other story might one tell? Consider this one: “Moral conflict is real, and any theory that denies this is false to moral reality. Once we understand the nature of kindness and of honesty, we see that, in cases like this one, they just do conflict. That conflict is not an illusion produced by incomplete moral interpretation; it is a matter of plain fact.” But what in the world could that supposed plain fact consist in? Kindness and honesty cannot just have one content or another, because moral claims cannot be barely true. I repeat tediously: no moral particles fix what these virtues just are. Nor do the concepts have a precise and conflicting content just in virtue of linguistic practice. Moral concepts are (as I have already begun to call them) interpretive concepts: their correct use is a matter of interpretation, and people who use them disagree about what the best interpretation is. Many people do believe that it would be an act of kindness to tell your colleague the truth. Or that it would not be dishonest, in this circumstance, to trim. They are not making a linguistic mistake.

There is another possibility. It might be that for some reason the best interpretation of our values requires that they conflict: that they serve our underlying moral responsibilities best if we conceive them in such a way that from time to time we must compromise one to serve another. Values don’t conflict just because they do, but because they work best for us when we conceptualize them so that they do. That is a conceivable view, and perhaps someone might make it seem plausible. That would not, however, show that conflict is just a stubborn fact we must recognize. It would provide an interpretation that reconciles values in a different way: by showing conflict as a deeper collaboration.

Do We Need Truth?

We have reached the foothills of full value holism—the hedgehog’s faith that all true values form an interlocking network, that each of our convictions about what is good or right or beautiful plays some role in supporting each of our other convictions in each of those domains of value. We can seek truth about morality only by pursuing coherence endorsed by conviction. We cannot will ourselves to embrace some conviction simply because it fits and unifies the rest of our convictions. We must also believe it or find something else that fits that we do believe. Equally, we cannot rest satisfied with convictions we find we believe if they do not fit. We must find convictions that we believe and that do fit. That is an interpretive process, as I said, because it seeks to understand each part and strand of value in the light of other strands and parts. No one can manage this fully, and there is no guarantee that we will all be able, even together, to manage it very well.

I intend no kind of relativism. I do not suggest that a moral opinion is true only for those who think it true. I mean to describe method, not metaphysics: how you must proceed if truth is on your agenda. Two people who both reason responsibly and find conviction in what they believe will reach different conclusions about what is right and wrong. But they will share the belief that there is a getting it right and a getting it wrong about what is right and wrong. A third person may challenge that shared belief: he may think that the fact of their disagreement indicates that there is no truth to be had. But that is only a third position of the same kind, a third moral stance to assess. Perhaps the third contestant cannot convince the first two to abandon the belief they share. Then he is in the same position as they are: there is no philosophical safe harbor in the neighborhood. We must each believe what we responsibly believe. We are all out on some limb, even if it is not the same limb.

Why then talk about true at all? Why not retire truth and speak only of responsibility? People seem more comfortable saying of some moral opinion not that it is true but that “it is true for me” or “it works for me.” These are sometimes taken to be skeptical confessions, but they are better understood as claiming responsibility in lieu of truth. I said, earlier in this chapter, that the value of moral philosophy depends more on its contribution to responsibility than to truth. Why then not drop truth altogether? We could just make and criticize arguments. That would come to the same thing as seeking and claiming truth, but without raising hackles as the vocabulary of truth seems always to do.

We would purchase that peace at considerable cost, however. Explicitly declaring a lack of interest in truth would pass for skepticism, and that would encourage all the confusion we uncovered in Part One. Insisting on truth has more positive virtues as well. It keeps before us the deepest philosophical challenge of this domain: to make sense of the idea that there is unique success to be had in inquiry, even when that inquiry is interpretive rather than empirical or logical, even when that inquiry admits no demonstration and promises no convergence. External skepticism is no threat to that idea. Internal skepticism exploits it—as in the case of wine, for instance. We must not only make sense of unique success in interpretive inquiry but struggle to achieve it.

Perhaps the vocabulary of truth seems more appropriate in science because we can more sensibly expect convergence there. It is worth noticing, however, that if we are thorough realists about science, we are threatened with an especially deep kind of error that is no threat in morals or other genres of interpretation. In science, if the physical world is as it is no matter whether there is any reason to think it is that way, we may be in irretrievable error. Our beliefs may be wrong in spite of the fact that we could find no evidence that they are wrong. We might be in fundamental and uncorrectable error about events in some other universe, for example, or about events so far away that their light cannot reach us before our universe expires. But because the truth about morality just is what the best case shows, our moral convictions cannot be irretrievably mistaken. Our culture or education or other factors of personal history may prevent us from appreciating the best case. But people with different personal histories might well discover and appreciate it. Moral truth is always within human grasp in a way that scientific truth may not always be.

One final observation. Earlier I disparaged Archimedean second-order meta-ethics. I should therefore say that I understand these preliminary remarks about truth in morals as themselves part of first-order moral theory, albeit the most abstract part. My claims about truth are drawn from the substantive theory of moral responsibility offered in this chapter and also from Hume’s principle, which is itself a thesis about moral responsibility. But my remarks are indeed only preliminary. We need to explore the idea of truth in morals further and more substantively; we do that at several points in the argument to come. First—immediately—as part of a wider inquiry into what interpretation is. ===============================================================================
p.449

➀ Jean Piaget, The Moral Judgment of the Child (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner, and Co., 1932); Lawrence Kohlberg, Essays on Moral Development, vol. 1: The Philosophy of Moral Development (San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1981); James Rest, Development in Judging Moral Issues (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1979); Carol Gilligan, “In a Different Voice: Women’s Conceptions of Self and Morality,” Harvard Educational Review 47, no. 4 (1977): 481–517.

➁ Not all moral philosophers agree. See Jonathan Dancy, “Ethical Particularism and Morally Relevant Properties,” Mind 92 (1983): 530–47.

➂ John Rawls, Lectures on the History of Moral Philosophy (Cambridge, Mass.:Harvard University Press, 2000), 148.

➃ See Richard H. Fallon Jr., “Is Moral Reasoning Conceptual Interpretation?” in Symposium: Justice for Hedgehogs: A Conference on Ronald Dworkin’s Forthcoming Book (special issue), Boston University Law Review 90, no. 2 (April 2010) (hereafter BU): 535; Amartya Sen, “Dworkin on Ethics and Freewill: Comments and Questions,” BU: 657.

➄ See, e.g., Martha Minow and Joseph Singer, “In Favor of Foxes: Pluralism as Fact and Aid to the Pursuit of Justice,” BU: 903. “It may actually be true that our values conflict” (906).

➅ Feynman, QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1985), 10, 12.

➆ See T. M. Scanlon, What We Owe to Each Other (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2000).

➇ See Nagel, Secular Philosophy and the Religious Temperament (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010). See the discussion of Nagel’s views in Chapter 7.

➈ Fallon, “Is Moral Reasoning Conceptual Interpretation?”

===============================================================================

Key concepts:

accuracy vs. responsibility (100)

authenticity (108)

axiomatic system (115): morons

barely true (114) vs. true for a reason
 - value judgment: true in virtue of a case (116)

case, making a (116)

desiderata 魚與熊掌 (118)

equal importance of all human lives (113)

evidence (116), vs. fact

filter (108)
 -integrity
 Our moral responsibility requires us to try to make our reflective convictions into as dense and effective a filter as we can and in that way to claim as much force as possible for conviction within the more general causal matrix of our personal history as a whole.
 -authenticity
 we must find convictions that grip us strongly enough to play the role of filters when we are pressed by competing motives that also flow from our personal histories

ground (116)

humanity (112)

integrity (101)
  the nerve of responsibility is integrity and that the epistemology of a morally responsible person is interpretive
  We are morally responsible to the degree that our various concrete interpretations achieve an overall integrity so that each supports the others in a network of value that we embrace authentically

interpretation (101): the process of seeking meaning in an event or achievement or institution

moral compartmentalization (105)

rationalization (104): someone rationalizes who genuinely believes that his conduct is governed by principles that in fact play no effective role in explaining what he actually decides to do

responsibility (102)
-as a virtue
 -intellectual
 -practical
 -ethical
 -moral
-as a relation between people and events
 -causal
 -assignment
 -liability
 -judgmental: someone has judgmental responsibility for some act if it is appropriate to rank his act on some scale of praise or criticism
why does responsibility matter?
- we respect people who accept the burden of responsibility
benefits:
-most vulnerable members of any community
-basic shared respect even in the face of moral diversity

moral properties “supervene” on ordinary properties (114)
 -barely true: physical facts in different possible worlds
 -values are interrelated
 -true value judgments are supported by reasons

The distinction between accuracy and responsibility in moral conviction is a further dimension of what I called the ordinary view (100)

There is no hierarchy of moral principles built on axiomatic foundations (117)