7 Interpretation in General (123)

Interpretive Truth?

You are interpreting me as you read this text. Historians interpret events and epochs, psychoanalysts dreams, sociologists and anthropologists societies and cultures, lawyers documents, critics poems, plays, and pictures, priests and rabbis sacred texts, and philosophers contested concepts. Each of these genres of interpretation houses a large variety of apparently different activities. Lawyers interpret contracts, wills, statutes, chains of precedent, democracy, and the spirit of constitutions; they dispute how far the methods appropriate to each of these exercises hold good for the others. Critics in art and literature count, as interpretations, such very different claims as that the value of art lies in moral instruction, that Piero della Francesca’s The Risen Christ is a pagan rather than a Christian painting, and that Shylock’s Jessica betrayed her father because she hated being a Jew.

In this chapter we consider interpretation in general. I argue that all these genres and types of interpretation share important features that make it appropriate to treat interpretation as one of two great domains of intellectual activity, standing as a full partner beside science in an embracing dualism of understanding. I try to answer the following questions. Is there truth to be had in interpretation? Can we sensibly say that one lawyer’s interpretation of the First Amendment, one critic’s reading of Yeats’s Among School Children, one historian’s understanding of the meaning of the American Revolution, is true and all conflicting interpretations false? (Or, what comes to the same thing, that one is the soundest or most accurate and the others each to some degree less sound or accurate?)

Or must we say that there are no true or false or even most or least accurate interpretations of these objects but only different interpretations of them? If there is truth (or unique success) in interpretation, then in what does this truth (or unique success) consist? What makes one reading of Yeats’s poem or the Constitution true or sound and others false or tinny? Is there some important difference between truth in interpretation and truth in science? Are these great domains of investigation sufficiently different in their structure to justify my large claim of an all-embracing dualism? Can the truth about interpretation take the form of internal skepticism? Can the unique truth be that there is no uniquely right interpretation but only a family of interpretations on a par with one another?

Of course, that we use a single word “interpretation” to describe all the apparently disparate genres I named is far from itself conclusive that they have some important feature in common. They may be related only by what Wittgenstein called “family resemblance”: perhaps, that is, legal reasoning shares some feature with conversational interpretation that makes it appropriate to say that lawyers interpret statutes, and historical argument shares a different feature with conversational interpretation that makes it appropriate to say that historians interpret historical events, but legal reasoning and historical argument nevertheless share no feature in virtue of which they are both examples of interpretation.➀ Language is often misleading in that way: there may be nothing we can usefully call interpretation in general.➁

Certainly there is no such thing as interpreting in general, that is, interpreting in the abstract rather than in some particular genre. Imagine that flashing dots of color suddenly appear on the wall in front of you as you read, and someone asks you to interpret those dots. You could not even make a beginning without some working assumptions about how the dots were created. You would have to decide whether to treat them as a coded message, perhaps from an extraterrestrial source, or as a light show designed by some artist, or as a template for a child’s drawing lesson, or as created in some other way for some different purpose. Only then could you begin to construct an interpretation; you would need, that is, to take up a particular genre of interpretation before you could interpret at all. That might suggest that the different genres have little in common. However, there is one important contrary indication. We find it natural to report our conclusions, in each and every genre of interpretation, in the language of intention or purpose. We speak of the meaning or significance of a passage in a poem or a play, of the point of a clause in a particular statute, of the motives that produced a particular dream, of the ambitions or understandings that shaped an event or an age.

Ambivalence

In Part One we several times noticed people’s characteristic ambivalence about their moral and other value judgments. We cannot resist thinking our moral convictions true, but many of us seem also unable to resist the contrary thought that that they can’t really be true. We find the same phenomenon throughout interpretation. Interpreters seem characteristically to assume that an interpretation can be sound or unsound, correct or incorrect, true or false. We accuse some people of misinterpreting us or Yeats or the Renaissance or the Sale of Goods Act; we suppose that there is truth to be found or missed about the meaning of each of these objects of interpretation. We distinguish between an accurate interpretation and one that is admirable in some other way. A musician might find great pleasure in listening to a Glenn Gould performance of a Beethoven sonata, for example, but nevertheless think that as an interpretation of the sonata Gould’s performance is a travesty. An American lawyer might wish that the equal protection clause could properly be interpreted as requiring states to spend as much educating students in poor neighborhoods as in rich ones, but agree that it cannot be so interpreted.➂

True, in some contexts it would sound odd as well as unusual for an interpreter to claim a unique truth. A director or actor who offers a new interpretation of Hamlet need not (and better not) claim that his interpretation is the only correct one and that all other approaches to the play are wrong. (The idea that there is no one best way to perform Hamlet on the stage is an example, as I shall argue later in the chapter, of successful internal skepticism about productions of a classic.) But it would be equally odd for a critic who has devoted his life to understanding that play to add, in a coda to his great work, that his study is only one among many interesting approaches and that other approaches are equally valid. In some circumstances skepticism would seem not only odd but outrageous. Imagine a judge sending an accused criminal to jail, perhaps to death, or awarding a huge verdict against a civil defendant, and then conceding in the course of his opinion that other interpretations of the law that would have required contrary decisions are just as valid as his own. Or a friend who insists that you keep a burdensome promise though he concedes that a different interpretation of what you said, which contains no promise, would be an equally successful report of your meaning.

So at least in most cases the phenomenology of interpretation—how it feels to interpreters—includes a sense that interpretation aims at truth. An eminent critic of an earlier day, F. R. Leavis, emphasized the demand of sincerity in criticism and said that aiming at truth was of the essence: “A real critical judgment, of its very nature, always means to be more than merely personal … Essentially, a critical judgment has the form, ‘This is so, isn’t it?’ ”➃ Another, probably equally influential, critic, Cleanth Brooks, said, “I suppose that the practicing critic can never be too often reminded of the gap between his reading and the ‘true’ reading of the poem … The alternatives are desperate: either we say that one person’s reading is as good as another … or else we take the lowest common denominator of the various readings that have been made.”➄

Nevertheless, just as some of us are uncomfortable flatly claiming truth for our moral convictions, many of us are uncomfortable making unqualified claims of truth for our interpretive judgments. Many lawyers, for example, who would be shocked to find the language I just imagined in a judge’s opinion, are nevertheless also troubled when legal philosophers suggest that there is always one best interpretation of a legal provision or precedent and that all the other interpretations are wrong. They prefer locutions that avoid that flat claim. An academic lawyer might say, for example, that though a particular interpretation of the equal protection clause seems the best to him, he knows that others disagree, and he cannot say that there is only one correct interpretation or that those who disagree with him are simply mistaken.➅ That bizarre form of words makes no sense at all: if in his opinion one interpretation is best, then, also in his opinion, contrary interpretations are inferior and he contradicts himself when he asserts that some of them are not. But the popularity of such incoherent statements underscores the uncertainty many people feel about the truth-seeking status of interpretation.

External skepticism is, of course, a constant temptation: some critics delight in saying that there is never one correct reading of a poem or a play but only different ones that happen to appeal to different people. They think their skeptical posture is justified by the fact that eminent critics often disagree. But external skepticism is as confused in art as it is in law and morals. Once we take care to distinguish uncertainty from indeterminacy, we see that a skeptical interpretive claim—that there is no one right way to read the poem or the clause—is itself an interpretive claim. Global interpretive skepticism must be internal—a dramatically ambitious claim that could only be redeemed by a heroically ambitious theory. This striking parallel between ambivalence in interpretation and in moral conviction reinforces the claim I made in Chapter 6: that moral reasoning is interpretive. It also poses an immediate challenge for this chapter. I must try to show how the account of truth and responsibility I offered in Chapter 6 fits not only moral interpretation but interpretation in general and explains the ambivalence we find in both the larger and the narrower domains. I must also respond to the other questions and challenges I described.

Most interpreters assume, in some moods at least, that their interpretive judgments can be true or false. But in what can that truth or falsity consist? And how can it follow from the truth of one that another is false—rather than simply about something else? In many genres interpreters differ strikingly not only in the conclusions they reach but in the methods they use to reach those conclusions. In literary interpretation, for example, new tribes of critics emerge daily claiming an entirely different—and better—way to read Spencer or Kerouac: we are treated to psychodynamic readings, all-within-the-text readings, reader response readings, cultural myth readings, Marxist and feminist readings. Can we make any sense of the competition among these tribes? Competition not just for academic promotion or power but for accuracy? Or should we say that each tribe pursues a different project, so that there is no more competition between them than between a doctor and a financial advisor? Scholars can be in conflict, after all, only when they are trying to answer the same question, and though these scholars seem to take themselves to be disagreeing with one another, often heatedly, they also set out very different questions to answer.

The phenomenology of interpretation raises other puzzles as well. Often we are struck by a particular reading of a poem—it feels right—yet we have nothing to say in favor of our opinion to other people who have other opinions. Nothing to say, that is, beyond just pointing to some passage and waiting for the conversion to take place. In some genres interpretation is characteristically ineffable. We sense that some performance of a sonata or production of a play is right, that it brings out what is really in the work, but that sense far outruns our ability to explain why it is right. In the case of some genres, moreover, we feel that interpretation would be spoiled by any self-conscious attempt at justification. It might be deadening for a musician to try to explain in any detail just why an interpretation that seems right is right. Perhaps he really should—whatever this means—just let the music speak to and for him. We often fall back on troublesome metaphors and personifications like that one: we say that the right interpretation leaps from the page or that the sonata itself dictates how it must be played or—most common—that a skilled and sensitive interpreter just “sees” what a work of art means or says.

In spite of these hesitations and opaque metaphors, however, the distinctive truth-seeking and argumentative phenomenology of interpretation survives. Interpretation would be a radically different intellectual activity if interpreters did not characteristically claim truth and assume disagreement rather than only difference. The ineffability we sense is therefore troubling: it makes a poor match with truth. If our instincts are right, and one reading of Yeats or the equal protection clause really is better than another, then why can’t we explain why it is? Interpretive judgments, like moral judgments, can’t be barely true. It can’t be just a brute fact with no further explanation that Shylock’s Jessica betrays her father because she is ashamed of being a Jew. There must be some further explanation of why that is true, if it is true. What in the world could make it true?

Psychological States

One answer to that daunting but inescapable question has seemed, to some interpreters, compelling across the range of interpretive genres. This is the familiar psychological state theory of interpretation. It holds that interpretive claims are made true, when they are true, by actual or counterfactual facts about the mental states of one or more people. If Jessica did hate being a Jew, that is so only in virtue of Shakespeare’s intention or assumption in writing her lines. If the equal protection clause forbids all racial quotas, that is so because the nineteenth-century authors of that clause, or the public for whom they acted, believed it would do that. If commerce rather than liberty was the moving ideal of the American Revolution, that is because a very large number of people who played central roles in that drama had commerce somehow in mind.

The mental states that make an interpretive claim true need not, on this view, be simple or even transparent to the people whose states they are. Shakespeare’s intention might have been subconscious. The congressmen who adopted the Fourteenth Amendment might not have thought about affirmative action racial quotas; it may only be true that they would have wanted their clause to forbid such quotas if they had thought about the matter. The thoughts that made commerce the point of a great revolution might have been made up by many hundreds of very different thoughts of many thousands of different people who were not aware of having any joint thought at all. But in the end it is psychological states of some kind that make an interpretive claim true, or nothing does.

It is easy to explain the popularity of this psychological state theory. It makes the truth of interpretive claims depend on an ordinary kind of fact; if it succeeds, therefore, it dissolves the mystery that seems to surround the idea of interpretive truth. There is nothing particularly mysterious about playwrights having intentions: after all, everyone does. The psychological state thesis also explains why we find it natural to speak of meanings and purposes in all genres of interpretation. The meanings and purposes in question are those, on this view, of the people whose mental states make interpretations true.

Nevertheless the psychological state thesis fairly obviously fails if we take it as a general theory of interpretation fit for all genres. It is normally correct about conversational interpretation. What makes you right in your understanding of what your friend said to you, if you are right, is essentially what he intended you to understand in speaking to you as he did. But in some genres the psychological state theory is plainly wrong, and in others it is both highly controversial and very implausible. It seems wholly implausible in historical interpretation: it is silly to think that whether the American Revolution should now be seen as dominated by commercial interests or political ideals turns on which thoughts were in the minds of either key actors or the relevant populations at large. It is now widely thought preposterous, among sophisticated lawyers, that the correct interpretation of a statute depends on the mental states of the legislators who enacted it.➆ Lawyers do speak of a “statutory intention” in explaining how they think a particular enactment should be read. But they cannot mean, by the intention of the statute, what the legislators had in mind as they voted. Many legislators do not understand the statutes they vote on, and those who do are as often moved by their own political motives—to please constituents, financial backers, or party leaders—as by any principles or policies that a lawyer might attribute to what they enact.

In the literary and artistic genres, what is called the “author’s intention” theory of interpretation has been popular in some periods but unfashionable in others. It played little or no role in early accounts of the point or value of art: both Plato and Aristotle, for example, assumed that whatever value art has lies in imitation, so that understanding a work of art consists only in identifying what it can be seen as copying. (Two millennia later Hamlet said that art is nature’s mirror.) The author’s intention theory was popular in the nineteenth and early twentieth century, particularly among critics who styled themselves romantics. But it has been under sustained attack since and is now generally dismissed as based on what extremely influential critics deemed the “intentional” fallacy.➇ On the newer view, once an author has released his work to the public he has no more authority than anyone else over what that work should be understood to mean. The author becomes, in a nice phrase of Paul Ricoeur’s, only “first reader.”➈ A successful theory of interpretation must explain both the popularity and the shortcomings of the psychological state theory; it must explain why that account of interpretation seems so natural in some genres, familiar but controversial in others, and ineligible in still others. It must also explain why, even in genres in which the psychological state theory is ruled out, we still find it natural to report our interpretive conclusions as claims about what something means.

The Value Theory

A successful theory of interpretation must achieve a tenuous balance. It must account for the sense and possibility of truth in interpretation, but it must also account for the ineffability of that truth and the familiar, irresolvable clash of opinion about where it lies. Neither skepticism nor simplicity will serve. I shall now formulate, though still only in a rough and perhaps cryptic way, the theory of interpretation that I try to defend in this chapter. Interpretation is a social phenomenon. We can interpret as we do only because there are practices or traditions of interpretation we can join: these are the practices that divide interpretation into the genres I listed. We can talk about the meaning of a statute or a poem or an epoch only because others do that: they understand what we mean to claim when we say that the equal protection clause permits affirmative action or that Lady Macbeth was or was not married before.

These social practices are truth-seeking. In each case, when we offer an interpretation of something, we state and are understood to be stating what we take to be the truth of some matter. We do not treat these interpretive practices as pointless exercises: we assume that something of value is and ought to be served by forming, presenting, and defending opinions about the scope of the equal protection clause or Lady Macbeth’s sexual history. We accept a responsibility, as interpreters, to promote that value. When we interpret any particular object or event, therefore, we are also interpreting the practice of interpretation in the genre that we take ourselves to have joined: we interpret that genre by attributing to it what we take to be its proper purpose—the value that it does and ought to provide.

Interpretation is therefore interpretive, just as morality is moral, all the way down. A particular interpretation succeeds—it achieves the truth about some object’s meaning—when it best realizes, for that object, the purposes properly assigned to the interpretive practice properly identified as pertinent. Interpretation can therefore be understood, analytically, to involve three stages. We interpret social practices, first, when we individuate those practices: when we take ourselves to be engaged in legal rather than literary interpretation. We interpret, second, when we attribute some package of purposes to the genre or subgenre we identify as pertinent, and, third, when we try to identify the best realization of that package of purposes on some particular occasion. There is space, at each level but particularly at the latter two, for a skeptical opinion: that there is no right answer to the question what value a genre serves or what best serves that value on this occasion. I return to that possibility later in this chapter, but it is important to notice, now, that a skeptical opinion is only a different interpretation. It rests as much on assumptions about value as any of the positive interpretations it challenges.

The level of convergence or divergence a particular interpretive community exhibits in these various judgments determines whether interpretation flourishes within that community or whether it dissipates into mere difference. The convergence required is greatest at the first stage. If there is no substantial agreement about what counts as literary rather than some other form of interpretation, then no genuine disagreement in literary interpretation is possible. It is greater at the second stage than the third: if lawyers did not agree that the interpretation of a statute is a political exercise, there could be no recognizable statutory interpretation. How much agreement is necessary at each stage to sustain the practice is not fixed a priori. We discover how much and what kind of disagreement can be tolerated only ex post: only by judging whether some particular practice of agreement and disagreement remains fruitful or runs into argumentative sand.

I warned that this skeletal account of the value theory of interpretation might seem cryptic. But it will prove helpful, I believe, to have at least this skeleton in hand before elaborating the theory through examples. Two immediate clarifications are necessary. First, few interpreters have a self-conscious articulate theory of the boundaries or point of any interpretive genre, though some academic interpreters do have such theories. Most interpreters collect a set of inarticulate assumptions unreflectively in and through their experience of interpreting; these may simply reflect the parallel and unquestioned assumptions of an interpretive subculture to which they belong because of their distinctive education and training. That helps to explain the ineffability I described: why an interpretation can seem compelling to someone, just as a matter of what he “sees” in the object being interpreted, even though he could not give any extended account of why.

I do not assume that interpreters adopt a self-conscious value strategy or that they are aware that they are interpreting a larger practice as they interpret a statute or a poem. I offer the value strategy as a reconstruction not as a psychological report of how they think. That account exposes, we might say, the submerged assumptions that we can sensibly attribute to interpreters to explain how they support or oppose interpretive claims—assumptions that redeem their intuitive sense that there is truth to be had in such claims.

Second, no sensible reconstruction of any interpreter’s judgment could reduce the sense he has formed, through training and experience, of the point of interpretation in his genre to a single crisp maxim. That is why I described an interpreter’s assumptions as an inarticulate package. If an interpreter in any genre actually tried to make an articulate and reasonably full case for any particular interpretive claim, he would draw on a complex web of background convictions that he could not have set out in advance but rather develops as he explains. We might be able to set out a single background assumption that all interpreters in a genre would endorse. We might say, for example, that a musical performance serves the purpose of recreating a work of art to make it come alive. But that anodyne level of description obliterates the complexity of what it tries to capture. The judgment that a particular interpretation of a particular object or event best realizes a practice’s value is always, therefore, a very complex claim, which of course adds to its inherently controversial character.

This is still very abstract. I can offer a quick example from legal practice because the structure of interpretation in that genre is relatively transparent.➉ Statutory interpretation aims to make the governance of the pertinent community fairer, wiser, and more just. That description fits what lawyers and judges do when they interpret statutes; it justifies that practice, in a general way, and it suggests, also in a very general way, what standards are appropriate for deciding which interpretation of a particular statute is most successful. But it is too abstract to be helpful in practice. Lawyers must rely on more refined and complex statements of the value of their practice actually to decide between competing interpretations.

They must decide, for example, what division of political authority among different branches of government and civil society is best, all things considered. That question in turn forces upon American lawyers, at least, further and more general questions of democratic theory; they must assume or decide, for instance, drawing on theory or instinct, how far unelected judges should assume an authority to decide for themselves which of the semantically available interpretations of a controversial statute would produce the best law. Each of these further questions, in its turn, implicates still further questions that would require, if they were pursued, deeper expeditions into political and moral theory that take lawyers even further from the particular statute that is their initial challenge. Disagreements among lawyers about the best interpretation of particular statutes are therefore symptoms of submerged and often unrecognized disagreements about these extensions and refinements. Lawyers who disagree about the best conception of democracy are likely to disagree, for that reason, about the best interpretation of the equal protection clause or even the Uniform Commercial Code.

Here is another, quite different and more concrete, example to bear in mind. A 2009 issue of the New York Review of Books reviewed the changing history of critical interpretations of the eighteenth-century French painter Antoine Watteau.⑪ The change in critics’ understanding of Watteau’s work over the centuries is striking. Initially he was celebrated (and later dismissed) as light, joyful, frivolous, even effeminate, an expression of the pleasure-seeking Parisians’ rapturous emancipation from the cultural oppression of the dour Sun King, a bridge to the rococo. Then, in the more severe nineteenth century, a new orthodoxy took hold: Watteau was very far from frivolous; on the contrary his “robust and virile” paintings, in the words of a prominent twentieth-century critic, were drenched in isolation and melancholy. In the latest book, under review in the article, the critic “wants to steep the paintings in the world he currently inhabits, and vice versa; in the process, Watteau’s own moment of novelty gets overlaid with the many versions of the modern that ensued … [his painting of the pierrot Gilles] taps us into the revival of mime theater in 1830s Paris and the resuscitation of that revival in Marcel Carné’s great film of 1945, Les Enfants du Paradis—not to mention Cézanne’s pictorial dalliances with pierrots in the 1880s, and Picasso’s after the Great War. And these give us a larger sense of what Watteau was up to … Gilles suggests a characteristically modernist anxiety.”⑫

This kaleidoscope of contradictory interpretation does not reflect revolutionary discoveries about Watteau’s artistic intentions. Nor is it helpful simply to say that later critics saw in the pictures what earlier ones had missed; on the contrary, the fact that different critics saw different things is part of what needs explaining. If we are to make sense of what seems undeniable—that each of the long succession of critics took himself to be right and others seriously wrong about “what Watteau was up to”—we must study not the critics’ research into the painter’s thoughts and ambitions but their sense of where value lies in art and of their own role in creating that value.

Important Distinctions (134)

Collaborative, Explanatory, and Conceptual Interpretation

The legal example crisply illustrates the skeleton description I offered of the value account. We reconstruct an interpretation by distinguishing three elements explicit or buried within it: first, a background identification of a practice or tradition to which the interpretation belongs (statutory or constitutional interpretation); second, a set of assumptions about the purpose of that practice (a theory of democracy that divides authority between parliaments and adjudicators); and third, a claim that the proffered interpretation realizes those purposive assumptions better than any alternative understanding. This still skeletal account is artificial in a variety of ways: it neglects, for instance, the interaction among the different steps. My sense of what the equal protection clause means and requires is not just drawn from but in turn colors my sense of the role of constitutional constraints in a democracy. Interpretation is holistic: just as a moral philosopher aims at holding together concrete moral opinions and abstract justifying principles, reinterpreting each of these as necessary to achieve that integration, so an interpreter seeks, though usually unawares, an integration of background values and concrete interpretive insights. Some surprising reading of a play may strike an interpreter as so suddenly illuminating—that the murder of King Hamlet was a desperate act of self-defense by discovered illicit lovers, for example⑬—that he comes to reject any abstract account of literary interpretation that would rule out that reading.

The skeleton is nevertheless important because it allows us to focus on the crucial connection between value in and standards of interpretation. The value account blurs the line between two questions we might have thought very different. What does some object—a law or a poem or a painting—mean? What kind of value does that object have, in itself or for us? The value account makes answers to the first of these questions sensitive to answers to the second. It supposes that as an interpreter’s understanding of a diverse mix of values shifts, so will his concrete interpretive opinions in any number of genres. The several authors of a recent and comprehensive anthology of literary theory and criticism, summarizing its over 2,500 pages of readings, report this connection between theories of the character and value of literature and theories about how to read that literature.

  Theories of literature and theories of reading have affinities with one another. Here are four instances. First, the formalist idea of literature as a well-made artistic object corresponds to the notion of reading as careful explication and evaluation of dense poetic style. Second, when viewed as the spiritual expression of a gifted seer, poetry elicits a biographical approach to criticism focused on the poet’s inner development. Third, dense historical symbolic works presuppose a theory of reading as exegesis or decipherment. Fourth, literature conceived as social text or discourse calls for cultural critique. While we can separate theories of literature from theories of interpretation, they often work hand in hand.⑭

The value account of interpretation extends this thesis across the different genres of interpretation. It encourages further and crucial distinctions among the different types of value that a genre or an occasion of interpretation might be thought to exhibit. It allows us to distinguish, for example, collaborative, explanatory, and conceptual occasions of interpretation. Collaborative interpretation assumes that the object of interpretation has an author or a creator and that the author has begun a project that the interpreter tries to advance. Conversational interpretation is almost always collaborative, and much literary and artistic interpretation is collaborative as well. Listeners or readers typically take themselves to be partners in a project initiated by a speaker or writer: they aim at a successful communication of what the latter intends to communicate. Sartre said that “creation can find its fulfillment only in reading, since the artist must entrust to another the job of carrying out what he has begun.”⑮ Law is also collaborative: a judge takes himself to aim at the same goal—justice—as the statesmen who made the laws he interprets. Even when he sees his role as entirely subordinate to theirs, the subordination is, in his view, itself justified by the overall goal of justice he shares with them.

Explanatory interpretation presupposes something different: not that interpreters are in partnership with those who created some object or event, but that an event has some particular significance for the audience the interpreter addresses. Historical, sociological, and psychodynamic interpretation are usually cases of explanatory interpretation. A historian who constructs a theory about the meaning of the French Revolution or the Holocaust is not in partnership with Jacobins or Nazis. Instead he tries to find the significance of these epochs and events for those he addresses. Conceptual interpretation is structured by yet a different assumption: that the interpreter seeks the meaning of a concept, like justice or truth, that has been created and recreated not by single authors but by the community whose concept it is, a community that includes the interpreter as a creator as well. In conceptual interpretation, that is, the distinction between creator and interpreter that marks collaborative and explanatory interpretation disappears, not because an interpreter is free to use these concepts as he wishes but because his use of the concept, in response to what he believes the right interpretation, will at least imperceptibly change the interpretive problem future interpreters face. I noticed conceptual interpretation earlier in this book: in explaining the concept of an agent’s having a reason. We take up conceptual interpretation in much more detail in Chapter 8.

In collaborative interpretation there is a direct connection between the value an interpreter assigns to the class of objects he interprets and the value he assigns to interpreting such objects. He treats himself as having joined an author in an attempt to realize, in a conversation, a law, a poem, or a picture, the value he believes it can and should have; how he interprets hinges on the latter judgment. A negative critic takes that process a further step. He argues that he cannot make a success of the collaboration. The author has not produced anything that can be interpreted as realizing the kind of value at which he should aim: the speaker has hidden his meaning in garbled syntax, the parliamentary draftsman’s text plainly commands injustice, the poem cannot be rescued from banality. These judgments assume that the interpreter has made the object he interprets the best it can be and that, on his lights, that is not good enough.

The most influential literary critics focus their skills, understandably, on success rather than failure—on universally acclaimed masterpieces—and they are explicit in relying on particular standards of literary excellence to justify that title. Consider the similarities and differences between the two critics I mentioned who insisted so forcefully on truth in interpretation. Leavis and Brooks were equally direct in rejecting the psychological state explanation of where that truth lies; they insisted that the meaning and value of a poem must be found in its text with no assistance from biography or from the author’s own account of what he was trying to achieve. They were therefore both, in that sense, formalists, but while Brooks dismissed any distinction between content and form, and denigrated the idea that literature should yield to “paraphrase,” Leavis emphasized the necessity of what he called moral seriousness in art. That emphasis is evident both in his ranking of the achievement of novelists (he counted Austen, Eliot, James, Conrad, and Lawrence as alone “great” English novelists because they best represented what he called the special “moral tradition” of that language) and in his interpretive reading of those novels: in his broad characterization of Portrait of a Lady as a “moral fable,” for example, and his confidence in such minute observations as that Lord Warburton would not have offered an English girl, with her different “ethics,” what he offered Isabel Archer: to “light your candle.”⑯

The difference between Brooks’s and Leavis’s visions of greatness in literature is alive in their different readings of Yeats. Leavis found few of Yeats’s poems great because he found them morally inaccurate; Brooks thought Yeats a master poet because he found Nietzsche in him. Compare Leavis’s account of Among School Children, which he counted among the few great Yeats poems because it “has the force of convinced and irresistible truth,”⑰ with Brooks’s treatment of the poem.⑱ Then compare both their readings with that of Yeats’s biographer, Roy Foster, who begins his study by reporting the impact that Yeats’s visit to St. Otteran’s School in Waterford had on his theories of education. Yeats mentioned the visit “more than once” in his Senate speeches on the subject and wrote Among School Children a few weeks after the visit. Foster has no doubt that the “Ledaean body” evoked for Yeats by a school child was that of his early lover, Maud Gonne, who had had an unhappy childhood and was now, like himself, “hollow of cheek,” and Foster describes the poem as “carrying a political charge” and as occupied with “the inadequate approaches to a philosophic understanding of the world epitomized by classical theories of education.”⑲

Brooks, writing decades earlier, anticipated and warned against both these ideas. He declared it as hardly worth saying that the poem is not some “abstract proposition” about education, and he regarded the identification of the Ledaean body with Gonne as a corrupting mistake—a mistake he attributed to “the perils of biographical bias.”⑳ Now consider a very different kind of critic, Northrup Fry, who utterly denied the anthem of “new critics” like Brooks that the value and meaning of a work of art is self-contained. Fry insisted that the greatness of literature required tapping effectively into archetypical cultural myths. (He made the grave-digger scene in Hamlet a memory of the myth of Liebestod, the operatic linking of love and death.㉑) Leavis read Yeats’s Sailing to Byzantium poem as a meditation coupling optimism and pessimism about death; Foster, as preoccupied “not so much with a heavenly city on earth” as with “artistic absorption in the act of creation”; Fry, as a superb example of the “comic” vision.㉒

When we turn from collaborative to explanatory interpretation, we see ascriptions of value operating at several levels. A historian may explain an event by ascribing purposes to particular historical actors: to the Austrian diplomats reacting to the archduke’s murder at Sarajevo, for example. Or, what is very different, by ascribing a collective intention to a great mass of people that could not be replaced by any description of the discrete intentions of individual people: that Americans were moved to independence by economic rather than political ambitions, for instance. But a historian’s general approach to history—which ascriptions of purpose he takes to be important or relevant, if indeed he takes any to be—depends on his own sense of the point and value of historical interpretation. Historians seek to make the past intelligible to the present, but they differ in their understandings of what dimensions of information or report best serve that purpose.㉓

Herbert Butterfield’s polemic against what he called the Whig interpretation of history beautifully illustrates that disagreement.㉔ “The Whig historian,” Butterfield declared, “can say that events take on their due proportions when observed through the lapse of time. He can say that events must be judged by their ultimate issues, which, since we can trace them no farther, we must at least follow down to the present. He can say that it is only in relation to the 20th century that one happening or another in the past has relevance or significance for us.”㉕ Butterfield contrasts his own opinion: “It is easy to see the fight between Christianity and Paganism as a play of forces and to discuss it so to speak in the abstract; but much more illuminating to watch it as the interplay of personalities and people … much more interesting if we can take the general statement with which we began … and pursue it in its concrete incidence till we discover into what manifold detail it differentiates itself. It is along this road that the historian carries us, away from the world of general ideas.”㉖

The differences in what two historians regard as “illuminating” or “interesting”—between Thomas Macaulay’s fascination with big ideas as moral lectures and Butterfield’s with minute details he found interesting just in themselves—shapes what each finds in history; what he takes to be the “meaning” of epochs and events. Butterfield says that the Whig historians were ignorant of the suffering that the religious wars caused. That is almost certainly untrue—how could they be?—but they may well have thought that the suffering, however deplorable, could contribute nothing of instruction to what makes the history of those wars valuable to us now. Marxist historians are different still; they write what the British Marxists called “history from below”—from the point of view of the poor and oppressed. That perspective cannot be explained, certainly not fully, by any assumption of historical materialism. It is better explained on the assumption that focusing attention on the history of oppression will help in the battle for a better society. If a historian thinks that history can be a weapon in the hands of the masses, that thought will teach him what to find important in history.

Independence, Complementarity, and Competition

We need yet another set of distinctions, however, before we can do even limited justice to the practices and attitudes of interpretation. We must distinguish between occasions on which two different interpretations of the same object or event are independent of one another, because each can either accept or deny the other, or be complementary to one another, because each takes itself to be adding insight to the other without challenging its accuracy or importance, or competitive with one another because each makes claims that assume that the other is in some way defective. A causal account of the genesis of some work of art—that the artist was commissioned to paint a donor’s portrait as worshipper and to use a good deal of expensive cobalt blue in the composition—would in itself be independent of any interpretive reading of the work: that the work is religious or ironic in character, for instance.

Carl Jung thought psychological explanations of why an artist writes or paints as he does independent of interpretation in the same way: “Though the material he works with and its individual treatment can easily be traced back to the poet’s personal relations with his parents, this does not enable us to understand his poetry.”㉗ Laurence Olivier’s Hamlet, however, reflected a psychodynamic interpretation in every gesture and intonation: the famous actor, like so many others of his time, used Freud not simply to speculate why Shakespeare wrote the closet scene as he did but to fix what the closet scene means, and though Olivier’s interpretation might be regarded as complementary rather than conflicting (I discuss that possibility later), it was certainly meant to teach audiences something about the play, not simply about its author.

How shall we tell whether two different interpretations of a particular work are independent, complementary, or conflicting? Whether Foster’s reading of Among School Children is meant simply to add information to nonbiographical readings like those of Brooks or Leavis, or rather to supply a better reading than either of theirs? That is itself a question of interpretation—not of Yeats, of course, but of these various critics. Consider this different example. The popular Shakespearean critic J. Dover Wilson argued that it is incontestable “that Shakespeare and his audience regarded Bolingbroke as a usurper.”㉘ He argued that Richard II must therefore be read as a defense of the legitimate order and that this reading is “evident from the whole tone and emphasis” of the play. Stephen Greenblatt, speaking for a movement he described as the “new historicism,” criticized Dover Wilson’s reading, not because he doubted the latter’s understanding of Tudor political opinion (though he noted that Elizabeth I appeared to take a different view), but because Dover Smith, though no New Critic, was assuming that the correct interpretation of a classic remains fixed over time—what the artist produced at a particular moment rather than a social artifact that changes as circumstances do. Greenblatt disagrees. Interpretations, he thinks, “are not intrinsic to the texts; rather than are made up and constantly redrawn by artists, audiences, and readers … In this light, the study of genre is an exploration of the poetics of culture.”㉙ He thus cites the importance of the fact that Dover Wilson’s lecture on the play was given in Weimar in 1939, when a defense of a legitimate though weak government might have seemed still very much in point.

We may be tempted to think that Greenblatt is not really disagreeing with Dover Wilson about the best interpretation of Richard II; that he is rather taking up a different project so that his work is independent, or perhaps complementary, but not conflicting. E. D. Hirsh, another prominent critic who favors the psychological state school of literary interpretation, distinguishes what he calls the significance of a work of art for its audience, which of course changes over time and place, from the meaning, which Hirsh believes is fixed.㉚ We might say that Dover Wilson lectured about the meaning of Richard II and Greenblatt about its significance, including its significance for Dover Wilson and his Weimar audience, so that the two critics did not really disagree. But this won’t work. We can’t read Greenblatt in that perhaps tempting way: he plainly thinks that the methods of interpretation once in vogue, now to be replaced by the new historicism he champions, are in some way not just limited to interpretation as distinct from social history but wrong as interpretation because they are insufficiently steeped in social history. It is the same with postmodernism, deconstructionism, critical feminist interpretation, and all the rest of the new small talk. They pick fights when they could settle for comfortable compatibility.

What are these fights about? What does Greenblatt think his new tribe of critics can do that is not just different from but better than what was done before? That is a difficult and neglected question: we need the value theory of interpretation to answer it. The projects Brooks or Leavis or Foster or Hirsh or Dover Wilson or Greenblatt announce are too different from one another to allow us to say that they follow the same interpretive methods but reach different conclusions. We can generate no more conflict just by comparing the methods these critics use than Jung saw between his psychology and any critic’s interpretation. We need to focus on what I called the second stage of a reconstructed interpretation—on the values the critics assign to a practice they take themselves to share—to find space for disagreement.

An interpretive school is a shared interpretation of the point of the larger practice a group of interpreters take themselves to have joined. For there is tradition in criticism as much as in creation: what T. S. Eliot said about poets—that they cannot write poetry except as part of a tradition that they interpret and through interpretation retrospectively shape—is true of critics as well.㉛ Literary critics see their craft as a tradition instinct with value and hence responsibility. They disagree about what that value is and therefore what responsibility they have. The New Critics did not simply choose a new occupation to take up, like a doctor switching specialties. They saw a defining responsibility in the traditions of literary criticism—a responsibility to make something grander of literature and particularly poetry than other techniques could. They thought their methods better suited to a better understanding of what the long practice of criticism demands of its practitioners. Marxist critics see a very different responsibility in the same tradition. Frederic Jameson said that in Marxist interpretation, “The individual text retains its formal structure as a symbolic act: yet the value and character of such symbolic action are now significantly modified and enlarged. On this rewriting, the individual utterance or text is grasped as a symbolic move in an essentially polemic and strategic ideological confrontation between the classes.”㉜

This is the deep dynamic that explains large and small shifts among schools and vogues of interpretation: the shared assumption of responsibility to a practice together with different assumptions about what that responsibility now demands. Judges, historians, and literary critics all take themselves to have responsibilities, roles to play given by the traditions of some genre. Their theories of those responsibilities are as much creative, and are even more evidently in conflict, than the discrete interpretations they propose in the light of those theories. Contrast the claim of Terry Eagleton, a Marxist critic, that “modern criticism was born of a struggle against the absolutist state” with the histories of critical tradition offered by representatives of almost any other interpretive style.㉝ We can find room for disagreement rather than just difference among interpretive schools only when we push that far back in an interpretive reconstruction of their arguments. It is only when we take seriously what the critics themselves say, noticing the other critics they take themselves to be disagreeing with, that we ourselves, interpreting them, can decide what independence and conflict there is in their different projects and styles. Only then can we see the independence of a Jungian explanation from a Freudian interpretation of Hamlet and the genuine conflict between Whig and Marxist understandings of religious wars and traditional and revisionary interpretations of Richard II.

Compare the deep conflicts among schools of interpretation in law. We see the parallels most clearly when we focus on judges, not because judges are the only interpreters of law—they are certainly not—but because both the responsibility and the tradition are clearer in their case than in that of advocate, professor, or citizen. The history of western adjudication, from Justinian to the International Criminal Court, shows a considerable variety in judges’ interpretations of their own responsibilities. What we now call “mechanical” or “conceptual” jurisprudence is part of that story, as are the more modern interpretive schools of judicial deference, legal realism, social policy, economic efficiency, interpretive analysis, and whatever comes next. It is easier to see these schools of adjudication as in competition than to see competition in other interpretive genres, because the institutional demands and consequences of adjudication remain constant as the schools of legal interpretation shift. But the shifts in conceptions of other interpretive roles even in our own time—of historians from Hugh Trevor Roper to Eric Hobsbawm, of journalists from Walter Lippman to Edward R. Murrow to Hunter Thompson, of art critics from Bernard Berenson to Svetlana Alpers and Michael Freed—shows a parallel interpretation and reinterpretation of responsibility.

I must not exaggerate the importance of these various distinctions among types of interpretation and relationships among them. It rarely matters in which box or boxes we place a critic’s work. We can profit from what seems illuminating without pursuing distracting issues of categorization or deciding how far different critics really disagree with one another. But sometimes the distinctions are essential, either to avoid confusion or to locate genuine and important disagreement we might have missed. In recent years, in universities and particularly in law schools, a variety of self-styled “critical” schools of interpretation have flourished and waned. Critical feminist interpretations of the oeuvre of Walt Disney point to the stereotyping of Minnie Mouse and her unquestioned subordination to Mickey.㉞ These seem, at first glance, exercises in explanatory, not collaborative, interpretation. The feminist critics certainly do not regard themselves as Disney’s partners in some aesthetic adventure. They seek to expose what they take to be one significant and malign aspect of popular culture: its sexist roots and hidden influences. Yet we cannot ignore the anger these writers feel at more conventional criticism that finds charm in the naiveté of anthropomorphized animals. In these critics’ opinion, ignoring the sexism is a failure in an important and traditional critical responsibility and helps to perpetuate what it ignores.

The rise and fall of what was called “critical legal studies” in American law schools provides an even better example of the same phenomenon. The “Crits,” as they called themselves, were anxious to debunk the widespread assumption that law is the product of legal officials trying to work out a coherent set of principles of personal and political morality for the regulation of social and commercial interaction. Crits aimed to expose the contradictions in legal doctrine produced by powerful groups pursuing their own interests rather than the impact of moral and political principle. That is explanatory interpretation: it claims contemporary significance in a particular account of how the law developed. There is no reason why critical legal studies, so understood, should think itself competitive with conventional collaborative interpretation that aims to improve the law by imposing some greater degree of integrity and principle on doctrine whose causal roots may well have been what the Crits claim they were. On the contrary, the two enterprises might well be thought complementary: aiming to improve law both by demystifying the origins of doctrine and then bending doctrine through enlightened interpretation to better ends. There is no conflict in finding the causes of legislation in greed and interpreting that legislation so as to thwart greed; it takes rose-colored glasses to deny the first but not to insist on the second.

But critical legal studies did take itself, and noisily, to be competitive with what its acolytes called “liberal legalism.” This combat may have reflected a crude confusion between interpretation and explanation, as I once perhaps uncharitably suggested.㉟ However, the posture of antagonism these scholars took up may have reflected a more profound judgment about the proper responsibilities of legal scholarship. If the proper goal of a demystifying explanatory interpretation is radically to change opinion and practice, then it might best achieve this by wearing collaborative clothing. It might try to interpret the practice it hopes to change in the worst light it can, which of course requires it to insist that this is the best light possible, and so to oppose any attempt to picture it better. That reading does make critical legal studies the enemy of liberal legalism.

Interpretive Skepticism (144)

These are examples of actual competition hidden by apparent independence or complementarity. It is often more soothing to suppose, in the opposite direction, that apparently contradictory interpretations are actually complementary or independent. In that way we might diffuse the tension between our inescapable sense that there is unique truth to be had in interpretation and our unease in actually claiming that truth in controversial cases. We tell ourselves that the unique truth is that there is no unique truth, that a work of art is greater when it can sustain wildly different readings, and we invoke the tired metaphor of a multifaceted diamond. But the occasions on which this strategy succeeds are relatively few.

One attempt to avoid direct competition is relativism—the thesis that correct standards of interpretation are relative to different schools or communities of interpreters. If so then different interpretations that appear to contradict one another really do not because they must be judged against different standards. Consider the various formulations of this view by the critic and columnist Stanley Fish. He argued, once, that certain crucial aspects of a poem can be appreciated only temporally, by a reader who has a series of reactions, some of which are cancelled or modified as he progresses. “Thus, in the case of three sonnets by Milton, what is really happening depends upon a moment of hesitation or syntactic slide … In a formalist analysis that moment will disappear, either because it has been flattened out and made into an (insoluble) crux or because it has been eliminated in the course of a procedure that is incapable of finding value in temporal phenomena.”㊱ There is nothing skeptical in this argument: on the contrary, it insists that any analysis that denies force in “temporal phenomena” like a “syntactic slide” inevitably misses something of objective value.

But later in the same essay (as published) Fish, in what he called a “self-consuming” act, took all this back. “I must give up the claims implicitly made in the first part of the essay. There I argue that a bad (because spatial) model had suppressed what was really happening, but by my own principles the notion ‘really happening’ is just one more interpretation.” Of course it is just one more interpretation. But it is not yet clear why it is not a better interpretation. Or a worse one. It doesn’t help to say, as Fish does, that a poem is created by a reading and that there is therefore no text independent of a particular reading and no reading independent of a particular reader. If we are drawn to that way of putting the point—there are others—our question then becomes: Why does one reading not create a better poem and therefore show the reader to be a better reader?

Still later Fish seemed to offer a flatly skeptical answer. He called his way of reading a “fiction” and declared, “My fiction is liberating. It relieves me of the obligation to be right (a standard that simply drops out) and demands only that I be interesting (a standard that can be met without any reference at all to an illusory objectivity).” But still later he called that last statement “the most unfortunate sentence I ever wrote,” and repudiated it because it implies “relativism.”㊲ But immediately thereafter he declared that standards of right and wrong in interpretation are indeed relative—to “community goals and assumptions.” That statement of relativism, too, is just one more interpretation, and we need to ask why it is true. Why are the goals and assumptions of one community not better than those of another? Why are they not the best they can be? If they are the best, then they are not just correct relative to that community. They are just correct, and the goals and assumptions of other communities are mistaken. Fish denies this possibility; he insists on relativism. But he needs a positive argument for this piece of internal skepticism, and I cannot find one. We cannot find one just in the familiar fact of the diversity of interpretive schools. Or in the lack of any Archimedean platform from which interpretations can be judged without any interpretive assumptions. That would only send us back to the failed arguments for external skepticism we canvassed in Part One.

I do not deny, however, that there are good positive arguments for internal skepticism in literary interpretation. A critic might think he shows a poem to be greater, and therefore better acquits his critical responsibility, when he insists that there is no single right way to read it. Earlier I mentioned Leavis’s reading of Sailing to Byzantium, which contains this: “Intensely the soul interrogates itself and its images of fulfillment and finds no answer that doesn’t turn into an irony … the ambiguity is essential and undeniable: Which is it—nostalgia for the country which is not for old men, or nostalgia for the eternal posited as the antithesis? The poet couldn’t, I think, have said, and in any case the question isn’t his but ours.”㊳ In this case, reading this poem, Leavis thinks moral seriousness best served by an understanding that depends on, rather than resolves, ambiguity. Two films of Michael Haneke, Hidden and The White Ribbon (English titles), provide further, though very different, examples. In both there is crime, but the criminals remain unidentified; what might (but needn’t) be the best interpretation of these films is that there is in fact no answer to who the criminals are, that in this case the world of fiction is incomplete in a way that, for a realist about history, the actual world cannot be.

I have already mentioned a yet different example. The public performance of a classic performed many times before is itself a subgenre of interpretation, and it is plainly part of the point of that subgenre that each performance offer some fresh claim about the work. Of course this understanding does not license a markedly inferior reading of an honored play or piece of music. But as I said, the director of a new production of Hamlet need not think that his interpretation is competitive with and superior to all different interpretations. It is enough if his interpretation displays something of character or poetry or connection with other literature or pictorial art or contemporary political or social significance that others have not, and that the text can reasonably sustain that interpretation. That is a daunting enough challenge, and many fewer directors than try actually succeed. But in any case complementarity is the presumption of this subgenre: the requirement of reasonable originality, as a distinct virtue of the genre, justifies our sense that it would be a mistake for any director to claim unique truth for his reading.

These are just samples: there are many other examples of successful skepticism in literary and other forms of the interpretation of art. But these are all cases of internal, not external, skepticism, and none of them justifies any wholesale or default skepticism. When interpretations of a work of art diverge, seeing conflict is more often a better and more instructive diagnosis than seeing facets of a brilliant diamond—more instructive because it requires us to trace out the roots of the conflict in deeper divergent understandings of the critical responsibilities in play.

Radical Translation (147)

I should mention one more example of alleged interpretive skepticism—one much more studied by philosophers than the others we have considered.㊴ It is drawn not from art or law but from a genre of interpretation rare in practice but topical in philosophy: translation from a language of which we have initially no even partial understanding. If we find speakers of that language, we can attempt translation through extensive study of their behavior. We attribute sense to the words they use by attributing different packages of beliefs and desires to them and trying to make sense of what they say against that background. But the same behavior will almost always be explicable through a large variety of very different packages: if we change our opinion about what these people think is true, or about what they desire to happen, then we would attribute very different meanings to what they say. Each of a great many different packages, taken as a whole, might fit their behavior equally as well. Willard Quine, whose study of the problem has greatly influenced philosophy of language, put the matter this way: “Manuals for translating one language into another can be set up in divergent ways, all compatible with the totality of speech disposition, yet incompatible with one another. In countless places they will diverge in giving, as their respective translations of a sentence of one language, sentences of the other language which stand to each other in no plausible sort of equivalence however loose.”㊵

We might therefore be tempted by a skeptical conclusion: there is no right answer to questions of radical translation but only different answers. Philosophers have said essentially that in different ways: that there are no such things as meanings, for example, or that translation is essentially indeterminate. These skeptical claims assume, however, that we must judge what makes best sense of behavior by asking only what package of attributes fits the raw facts of behavior; it claims indeterminacy because many packages fit those raw facts just as well. But radical translation is best understood as a kind of collaborative interpretation—we imagine ourselves in conversation with speakers of the language for the great variety of purposes that normally provoke conversation. It is therefore sensible to adopt assumptions about the language and its speakers that seem necessary to achieving any such purpose: assumptions such that, if they do not hold, any project of useful communication or transaction is anyway doomed.

We can understand Donald Davidson’s suggested principles of charity and coherence in that light.㊶ We assume that the speakers we aim to understand employ the same logic as we do and that their beliefs are in general true, though not necessarily true in each case. Because the purposes of translation would have no point except on those assumptions, we proceed on that basis. Suppose that even then, accepting these constraints, we produce two markedly different radical translations of the same language: two packages of belief, desire, and meaning, each of which fits all the evidence. These are competitive; if we label one “correct,” then we must suppose the other not correct. Is one better, all things considered?

We must take care, as always when such a question is posed, to distinguish uncertainty from indeterminacy. We would be entitled to the latter very strong positive conclusion only if we had uncovered some positive reason for supposing that there is nothing to choose between divergent translations, given the broad range of purposes an interpretation must serve. In fact different translators have achieved a great deal of uniformity in meeting actual challenges in radical translation; this might suggest that indeterminacy, as distinct from uncertainty, is rare.㊷ We would think otherwise, of course, if we supposed that success in this kind of interpretation means only fitting the raw behavioral facts.

Perhaps Davidson made that last assumption when he said: “The totality of evidence available to the interpreter determines no unique theory of truth for a given speaker … because all possible evidence cannot limit acceptable theories to one.” But, as he insisted, there is more to interpretation than fit. Though he allowed that “we may say, if we please, that interpretation or translation is indeterminate,” he also compared that indeterminacy to the fact that a bath’s temperature can be measured in either Fahrenheit or centigrade.㊸ He must have thought that though a huge number of different packages of attribution would fit the behavioral data, the interpretive strategies that served our actual purposes would normally narrow those packages to a few whose differences were only terminological. If that is true, then there may be little indeterminacy in the sense Quine had in mind. Perhaps we are not often faced with equally good interpretations that “stand to each other in no plausible sort of equivalence.”

The Value Account: A Summary (149)

Does the value account of interpretation satisfy the conditions I laid down earlier in this chapter for a successful theory of interpretation? It is adequately general: it claims application over all the genres of interpretation I listed. It also explains why there is nothing that might be called interpreting in general, apart from a particular genre. If the success of any particular interpretive claim depends on a successful account of the value of interpreting in some genre, then of course interpretation cannot begin until that genre is specified or assumed in what I called the first stage of interpretation. Interpreting light flashes as a message has a dramatically different point from interpreting them as artistic expression.

The value account also explains, as I said any general theory of interpretation must, why the role of some creator’s psychological state is so often controversial. Authors’ states of mind are pertinent when, and in the way that, they are made pertinent by the best account of the value served by interpreting in the genre in question. Conversational interpretation is dominated by speakers’ intentions because the point of interpreting in conversation is almost always the communication of such intentions. Legal interpretation is not dominated by the actual mental states of legislators and other officials because the best understanding of the purpose of interpreting statutes and other legal data makes irrelevant most of what those officials actually think or intend. The role of an author’s intention is controversial in the interpretation of literature, and the importance that critics attach to that intention fluctuates, because it is controversial among critics how far the value of a work of art depends on an author’s inspiration and its realization in the work.

In the early nineteenth century, when the author’s-intention tradition was particularly strong, its supporters argued that an author’s intentions should control interpretation because only in that way could the real value of literature be realized. Here is Coleridge:

  What is poetry? is so nearly the same question with, what is a poet? that the answer to the one is involved in the solution of the other. For it is a distinction resulting from the poetic genius itself, which sustains and modifies the images, thoughts, and emotions of the poet’s own mind … He diffuses a tone, and spirit of unity, that blends, and (as it were) fuses, each into each, by that synthetic and magical power, to which we have exclusively appropriated the name of imagination.㊹

How could anyone who embraced that romantic, dancer-and-dance view of poet and poem not assume that the point of criticism is to bring that genius of imagination into proper view? Contrast Tom Stoppard’s very different view of the critic’s role: he said a critic is like a customs inspector who finds much in a work that the author must admit is there though he claims, truthfully, that he did not pack it.㊺ Still other views about the role and importance of “the first reader” reflect yet different assumptions about the value of the critical enterprise. Many of them subordinate any alleged authorial genius to something quite different: to the work of art judged on its own, as orphan or objet trouvé, to the opportunities for surprise offered to a contemporary reader, to the moral instruction or social or political consciousness of a new age. The author’s authority rises and falls, dies and is reborn, as opinion shifts about what interpretation is for.

The value account answers other questions I posed. As I said, it explains the ambivalence we everywhere find about truth in interpretation. Disagreement is patent, but its source almost always is obscure, buried in a large variety of unarticulated assumptions about law or art or literature or history that rarely surface and that can be explained only as the upshot of some combination of inherent taste, training, acculturation, allegiance, and habit. No wonder we speak so naturally of just “seeing” a poem or a picture one way or another: that is often and inescapably how the judgment feels. Of course, it seems arrogant to thoughtful people to insist that there is then one exclusive truth about the interpretive issue in hand, that those who do not see the statute or painting as they do are simply in error. It seems more realistic and modest to say that there is no one right interpretation but only different acceptable or responsible ones.

And yet that is exactly what we must not say if we are honest, because it is not what we believe or can believe. To repeat: a scholar who labors for years over a new reading of Hamlet cannot believe that his various interpretive conclusions are no more valid than the contradictory conclusions of other scholars; a judge who sends someone to jail on an interpretation of the law he believes no better than, but only different from, rival interpretations should be jailed himself. The value account redeems our conviction of truth in the face of all the complexity, controversy, and ineffability. If interpreters accept that some complex web of value defines success in their enterprise, then they can sensibly believe that these values can be identified and better served by one particular interpretation, on any interpretive occasion, than by others. Conversely, if they have come to think that one interpretation of something is best, they can also sensibly think that that interpretation meets the test of what defines success in the enterprise, even if they cannot articulate that test in much or any detail. So they can think there is objective truth in interpretation. But only, of course, if they think there is objective truth in value. The argument of Part One of this book is a necessary foundation for the argument of this part.

We have already noticed one maneuver that helps people think they are not arrogant in insisting on their favored interpretations. They say that while scientific claims are true or false, interpretive judgments are something different. They are sound or unsound, or more or less reasonable, or something of that sort. These distinctions are empty. Of course we can stipulate that “true” is to be used as the endorsing operator for scientific judgments and “most reasonable” as the endorsing operator for interpretive judgments. But that stipulation would be pointless because we can claim no utility for it.㊻ We cannot map the distinction onto any more familiar distinction by explaining, for instance, that “true” indicates objectivity while “most reasonable” indicates only subjectivity, or that “true” marks a cognitive judgment while “most reasonable” marks some form of noncognitive expression. On the contrary, any alternate endorsing term for interpretive judgments would have to signify, if it is to fit what we think, exactly what “true” signifies: unique success. The important differences between scientific and interpretive judgments reflect differences in the content of the two kinds of judgment rather than the eligibility of one, though not the other, for truth.

Science and Interpretation (152)

What are those differences? I asked, among the questions I posed at the start of this chapter, how interpretation differs from science. Philosophers, historians, and social scientists have proposed a grand distinction between two kinds of investigation: what some philosophers have called explanation and understanding.㊼ Those who believe the distinction fundamental hold that the natural sciences seek explanations that do not suppose purposes whereas history and sociology, among other humane disciplines, seek comprehension through purpose. This chapter has offered a somewhat different version of the same distinction. I take understanding to mean interpreting. Interpretation differs from science because interpretation is purposive, not just in the vocabulary of its claims but in the standards of its success.

We start by distinguishing between the intrinsic and justifying goals of any inquiry. Whenever we investigate anything—black holes or the causes of the First World War or the demography of the Cayman Islands or the ambiguities in Yeats’s poetry—our intrinsic goal is to find the truth about something. If we did not have that goal, we would not be inquiring. But we can also identify justifying goals of inquiry: these are the goals or purposes that we believe justify trying to find that truth. We believe that medical research is justified, for example, because it prevents and cures disease. Many of what we take to be justifying goals of science are practical in that way: research in agricultural biology is justified because it promises to feed more people; research in consumer electronics because it will provide desired entertainment and prosperity.

The justifying goals of science are not always that immediately practical, however. We study cosmology out of fascination with its mysteries, excited by the sheer drama of our universe’s history. That is not a practical goal, but it is nevertheless a justifying one, because it includes an ambition not only for truth but for truth about something we deem of fundamental importance for us to know. We do not try to discover how many rocks weighing two pounds or more there are in Africa. If we did, then the intrinsic goal of the study would be to determine the truth of that matter, but we do not because the study would not serve any justifying goal, practical or theoretical.

Justifying goals play an evidently important role in science. They explain not only which questions scientists try to answer and which studies governments or foundations finance, but also when we think it right to rest content with some claim of truth that falls far short, as many significant scientific claims do, of certainty. Nevertheless, in spite of these important effects, we must never conflate the justifying goals with the intrinsic goals of science; in particular we must not suppose that justifying goals enter into any test of success in finding truth.㊽ We may study cosmology because we are enchanted with the vastness of space, but the truth of the big bang theory does not turn on whether it enchants us. That we want to cross rivers is no part of the case for the truth of the principles that predict when bridges stay up or fall down. To think otherwise would collapse the indispensable distinction between scientific truth and our reasons for wanting the truth. It is part of the organizing structure of our science—part of what it is essential to understand if we are to achieve our justifying goals—that justifying goals have nothing to do with truth. It may be, as some great philosophers have insisted, that this crucial separation between truth and purpose in science reflects and serves human purposes at some higher level of abstraction. (I touch on that possibility in the next chapter.) But that speculation confirms rather than challenges the importance of the distinction.

Interpretation is dramatically different. In that realm justifying purpose is at the heart of success. If the value account is right, our standards for success in an interpretive genre do depend, in the way I tried to describe, on what we take to be the best understanding of the point of interpreting in that genre. In interpretation, we might say, justifying and intrinsic goals merge. Interpreters make or just have assumptions about these purposes and the values that support them, and these assumptions, though often inarticulate and unrecognized, are determinative of which interpretive claims they accept and which they reject.

That great difference between the two great worlds of inquiry, science and interpretation, matches and explains several of the differences we noticed in earlier chapters between science and morality. Unlike scientific claims, interpretive propositions cannot be barely true: they can be true only in virtue of an interpretive justification that draws on a complex of values, none of which can be barely true either. It cannot be that the best interpretation of the equal protection clause makes it unconstitutional for states to refuse driving licenses to infants, just as a matter of how things actually are, though no lawyer has any reason to think so, or that Sailing to Byzantium is really an attack on British imperialism even though there can be no deeper explanation of why that is so. An interpretation is not evidence of some further fact. A true interpretive claim is true because the reasons for accepting it are better than the reasons for accepting any rival interpretive claim. That is why, when we reconstruct the reasoning of a great critic, we must speak of a web rather than a chain of value.

Interpretation is pervasively holistic. An interpretation weaves together hosts of values and assumptions of very different kinds, drawn from very different kinds of judgment or experience, and the network of values that figure in an interpretive case accepts no hierarchy of dominance and subordination. The network faces the challenge of conviction as a whole; if any one strand is changed, the result may be locally seismic. Someone’s second-best interpretation of a poem or a picture may be radically different from his first best; a third interpretation that is only slightly different from the first may seem much worse. True, some persuasive philosophers argue that science is holistic too: that our science, as Quine put it, also confronts the bar of experience as a whole.㊾ They say that there is no belief about the physical world, however established and indubitable it now seems, that we could not give up if we also surrendered all the other beliefs we now hold and began again to describe and account for the physical world in an entirely different vocabulary.

But holism in science, if we accept it at all, is almost entirely academic and passive: it can play no part in almost anyone’s practical life. In ordinary practice we think about physics and plant ecology and how far personality depends on genes in a straightforwardly linear way. We reason to new beliefs from the same incalculably great mass of what we all take for granted, and we reason on evidence whose force and limits we mainly all recognize. Our acquisitions and shifts in belief are almost all incremental: we test hypotheses on the assumption that they, and nothing else, are at risk in the test. That is not invariably true. It is not true in the more speculative regions of theoretical physics or, perhaps, in basic biology. New evidence can call into question a good deal of what seemed settled. Let Stephen Hawking say that black holes do not, after all, destroy information, and suddenly formerly intriguing theories about alternative universes evaporate.㊿ But the difference between what one responsible scientist thinks about the world we actually encounter and what others think, because he accepts some controversial opinion that they reject, is generally small compared to what they all think in common. Matters stand very differently in interpretation: literary critics or constitutional lawyers whose values are strikingly different in some pertinent respect are likely to disagree across a very broad area of interpretive convictions. We saw ample evidence of that kind of leverage in this chapter. In interpretation, holism is not passive; it is very active.

Recognizing these differences between science and interpretation offers yet more help in explaining our unease about claiming truth for our interpretations. What interpretation lacks is exactly what gives science a sense of solidity. The permissibility of bare truth gives us an enormous boost in metaphysical confidence. Not, of course, confidence that we have the truth about the world—indeed, we noticed that the idea of bare truth makes possible a very deep, irremediable kind of mistake—but confidence that there is truth to be had. When no truth can be bare, that comfort disappears. Any doubts we may have about the soundness of our interpretive case remind us of the possibility, which we cannot automatically exclude, of deep internal skepticism: that there is no best case and therefore no right answer. The fact that the justifying goals of science are irrelevant to truth is another source of solidity in science. Knowing that people’s differences in what they take to be the justifying goals of science can play no role in fixing what they take to be scientific truth makes it profitable for us to expect convergence of opinion in that domain.

In interpretation, on the contrary, differences in justifying purpose and ambition are automatically differences in method; argument is not shielded from these differences but is rather shaped by them. Convergence therefore seems problematic and, so far as it does occur, accidental. The linearity of science is another source of comfort: controversy about novel claims or hypotheses is not threatening because, even in speculative regions, castles of sand are built on what seems undeniably firm ground. The active holism of interpretation means, on the contrary, that there is no firm ground at all, that even when our interpretive conclusions seem inescapable, when we think there really is nothing else to think, we are still stalked by the ineffability of that conviction.

We cannot escape a sense of the airiness and contingency of our interpretive convictions because we know that other people do think what we cannot think and that there is no lever of argument that we can press to convince them. Or they us. There is no experiment that must reconcile our disparate certainties. Still, for all that, we are left only with uncertainty, not nihilism. If you want more—if you want the quietus of an interpretive skepticism—you must argue for it, and your arguments will be just as airy, just as controversial, just as unconvincing to others as the positive arguments that dissatisfy you now. So—yet again—everything depends in the end on what you actually and responsibly think. Not because your thinking makes it right, but because, in thinking it right, you think it right.

===============================================================================
p.450

➀ Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations (Oxford: Blackwell, 1953).

➁ For example, I do not argue that my account of interpretation in this chapter fits what is often called the interpretation of data by scientists. But perhaps it does. We might treat scientific interpretation as what I later call explanatory interpretation.

➂ See San Antonio Independent Sch. Dist. v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1. (1973).

➃ F. R. Leavis, Valuation in Criticism and Other Essays, ed. G. Singh (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986).

➄ Cleanth Brooks, “The Formalist Critics,” in Julie Rivkin and Michael Ryan, eds., Literary Theory: An Anthology, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Blackwell, 2004), 24.

➅ The opinion is not confined to academic lawyers: some judges off duty are fond of the same expressions. See Stephen Guest’s account of a radio discussion in which the eminent judge Lord Bingham participated (Guest, “Objectivity and Value: Legal Arguments and the Fallibility of Judges,” in Michael Freeman and Ross Harrison, eds., Law and Philosophy [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007], 76–103).

➆ Ronald Dworkin, Law’s Empire (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1986), 313–27; but see Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation: Federal Courts and the Law (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998), 16–18.

➇ William Wimsatt and Monroe Beardsley, “The Intentional Fallacy,” in Wimsatt, The Verbal Icon: Studies in the Meaning of Poetry (Lexington: University of Kentucky Press, 1954), 3–18.

➈ “Does the author appear otherwise than as first reader? The distancing of the text from its author is already a phenomenon of the first reading that, in one move, poses the whole series of problems that we are now going to confront concerning the relations between explanation and interpretation. These relations arise at the time of reading” (Paul Ricoeur, “What Is a Text? Explanation and Understanding,” in Hermeneutics and the Human Sciences: Essays on Language, Action and Interpretation, trans. John Thompson [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981], 149).

➉ See Dworkin, Law’s Empire, particularly chapter 9.

⑪ Julian Bell, “The Pleasure of Watteau,” New York Review, February 12, 2009, reviewing Jed Perl, Antoine’s Alphabet: Watteau and His World (New York: Knopf, 2008).

⑫ New York Review of Books, February 12, 2009, 13.

⑬ See John Updike’s Claudius and Gertrude (New York: Knopf, 1993).

⑭ The Norton Anthology of Theory and Criticism, ed. Vincent Leitch, William Cain, Laurie Finke, Barbara Johnson, John McGowan, and Jeffrey Williams (New York: W. W. Norton, 2001), 6–7.

⑮ Jean-Paul Sartre, “Why Write?” in Twentieth Century Literary Criticism, ed. David Lodge (London: Longman, 1972), 371, 375. He added that to make literature “come into view a concrete act called reading is necessary, and it lasts only as long as this act can last. Beyond that, there are only black marks on paper” (371).

⑯ F. R. Leavis, The Great Tradition (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1972), 176, 173.

⑰ Leavis, Valuation in Criticism, 100.

⑱ Cleanth Brooks, The Hidden God: Studies in Hemingway, Faulkner, Yeats, Eliot, and Warren (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1963), chapter 4, 57; Brooks, The Well Wrought Urn: Studies in the Structure of Poetry (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1947), chapter 10.

⑲ Roy Foster, W. B. Yeats: A Life, vol. 2: The Arch-Poet 1915–1939 (New York: Oxford University Press, 2003), 322–24.

⑳ Brooks, The Well Wrought Urn, 185.

㉑ Norton Anthology of Theory and Criticism, 1450.

㉒ Foster, W. B. Yeats, 328; Northrop Frye, “The Archetypes of Literature,” in Norton Anthology of Theory and Criticism, 1445–57.

㉓ Of course not all history is sensibly treated as interpretive. Much is just retrieval of information from the past: who won what battles and what weapons were at their disposal, for example. However, the radical opinion that history is interpretive even at that level has been defended (Hayden White, Metahistory: The Historical Imagination in Nineteenth-Century Europe [Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1973]).

㉔ Butterfield had particularly in mind Thomas Macaulay, who was the most celebrated and influential of the Whig historians. Macaulay saw the history of Britain as a smooth progression to a more perfect society. “The history of our country,” he wrote in the first paragraph of his most famous work, “during the last hundred and sixty years is eminently the history of physical, of moral, and of intellectual improvement” (The History of England from the Accession of James I [London: Penguin Classics, 1979]). Butterfield was contemptuous of such optimism and moral judgment, but he at least flirted with “general ideas” himself, including the important claim that political necessity rather than moral inspiration produced the greater liberty in Britain that Macaulay celebrated.

㉕ Herbert Butterfield, The Whig Interpretation of History (New York: Norton, 1965), 13.

㉖ Ibid., 71.

㉗ Jung, “On the Relation of Analytical Psychology to Poetry,” in The Spirit in Man, Art and Literature, 4th ed. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978).

㉘ John Dover Wilson, “The Political Background of Shakespeare’s Richard II and Henry IV,” Shakespeare-Jahrbuch (1939): 47.

㉙ Greenblatt, The Power of Forms in the English Renaissance (Norman, Okla.: Pilgrim Books, 1982), 6.

㉚ E. D. Hirsch, Validity in Interpretation (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1967), 6–10.

㉛ T. S. Eliot, “Tradition and the Individual Talent,” in The Sacred Wood: Essays on Poetry and Criticism (London: Methuen, 1920).

㉜ Frederic Jameson, The Political Unconscious: Narrative as a Socially Symbolic Act (London: Methuen, 1981), 73, 85.

㉝ Terry Eagleton, The Function of Criticism: From the Spectator to PostStructuralism. London: Verso.

㉞ See Lyn Mikel Brown, Girlfighting: Rejection and Betrayal among Girls (New York: New York University Press, 2003).

㉟ See Dworkin, Law’s Empire, 266–75.

㊱ Stanley Fish, Is There a Text in This Class? (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1980), 147.

㊲ Ibid., 167, 180, 174.

㊳ Leavis, Valuation in Criticism, 93.

㊴ I summarize in these paragraphs a complex and extensively debated issue in the philosophy of language. See W. V. O. Quine, Word and Object (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1960); and D. Davidson, “A Coherence Theory of Truth and Knowledge,” in D. Henrich, ed., Kant oder Hegel? (Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, 1983).

㊵ Quine, Ontological Relativity: And Other Essays (New York: Columbia University Press, 1969), 27.

㊶ Donald Davidson, “Radical Interpretation,” Dialectica 27 (1973): 314–28.

㊷ See, e.g., John Wallace, “Translation Theories and the Decipherment of Linear B,” in E. Lepore, ed., Truth and Interpretation: Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald Davidson (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1986), 211.

㊸ “Three Varieties of Knowledge,” in Donald Davidson, Subjective, Intersubjective, Objective (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001), 214.

㊹ Coleridge, “Biographia Literaria,” in Norton Anthology of Theory and Criticism, 681.

㊺ Annette Barnes reports this description in Stoppard’s lecture at Johns Hopkins University. See her On Interpretation (Oxford: Blackwell, 1988), 166.

㊻ Edwin Baker suggested that people prefer “most reasonable” to “true” because the former allows comparative judgments while the latter does not. (Baker, “In Hedgehog Solidarity,” in Symposium: Justice for Hedgehogs: A Conference on Ronald Dworkin’s Forthcoming Book [special issue], Boston University Law Review 90, no. 2 [April 2010]: 759. But “true” allows comparatives as well: we are comfortable saying that one view is closer to the truth than another, and we can say this even when we cannot claim full truth for any view. In her interesting book On Interpretation, Annette Barnes distinguishes “true” from “acceptable.” She limits truth in interpretation to correct judgments of “artistic intent.” “While only one of the two incompatible interpretations can be true,” she says, “the other can make the most sense of the work, or make the work a more significant or successful work” (78–79). In that case, she says, the latter interpretation “could compete with the demand that the interpretation be true” (60). The value theory of interpretation I defend in the text denies the competition: these are only two ways of describing the overall best interpretation.

㊼ See Georg Henrik von Wright, Explanation and Understanding (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1971), 5.

㊽ Philosophers of science call attention to the importance of what Hilary Putnam and others have called “epistemic” values. See Hilary Putnam, The Collapse of the Fact/Value Dichotomy and Other Essays (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002). Scientists prefer simple to more complex theories, and elegant to inelegant theories (Judith Wechsler, ed., On Aesthetics in Science [Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1981]; Brian Greene, The Elegant Universe: Superstrings, Hidden Dimensions, and the Quest for the Ultimate Theory [New York: Vintage, 2000]; Greene, “The Elegant Universe,” NOVA, PBS TV miniseries, WGBH Educational Foundation, 2003 [interviews with string theorists about the role of elegance and related considerations in string theory]). We must take care to distinguish these epistemic values from justifying goals. Simplicity and elegance count in deciding which of different theories or hypotheses to prefer. They are hypotheses about truth that cannot be tested directly because any test would employ them. They are not, however, assumptions about the purposes of scientific study or theory. We prefer an elegant to an inelegant theory of the universe, but we do not study the universe to find examples of elegance. We might, after all, find an elegant explanation of the number of rocks in Africa.

㊾ Willard V. O. Quine, “Two Dogmas of Empiricism,” in From a Logical Point of View: Nine Logico-Philosophical Essays, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2006), 37–46.

㊿ David White house, “Black Holes Turned ‘Inside Out,’ ” BBC News, July 22, 2004, news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/3913145.stm.

===============================================================================

Key concepts:

dualism of understanding (123): science and interpretation

formalism (135)

ineffability (128)

intention/purpose (125)

interpretation:
-intrepretative
-a social phenomenon
-truth-seeking
-three stages:
 -we interpret social practices; we individuate those practices
 -we attribute some package of purposes to the genre or subgenre we identify as pertinent
 -we try to identify the best realization of that package of purposes on some particular occasion

occasions of interpretation:
-collaborative: interpreters are in partnership with those who created some object or event
-explanatory: an event has some particular significance for the audience the interpreter addresses
-conceptual
-independent
-complementary
-competitive

science vs. interpretation (153)
-science: intrinsic goals vs. justifying goals
-interpretation: the two types of goals merge
-science: holism is passive
-interpretation: holism is active

interpreter
-submerged assumptions: ineffability
-no maxims, no hierarchy of values

psychological state theory (128)