8 Conceptual Interpretation (157)

How Is Disagreement Possible?

Moral reasoning is interpretation, but it is not collaborative or explanatory interpretation. It belongs to the third type I distinguished in the last chapter: conceptual interpretation. People have together developed a great variety of moral concepts—the concepts of reasonableness, for instance, honesty, trustworthiness, tactfulness, decency, responsibility, cruelty, shabbiness, insensitivity, deceit, and brutality, as well as the special political concepts of legitimacy, justice, liberty, equality, democracy, and law. We develop our moral personalities through interpretations of what it is to be honest or reasonable or cruel, or what actions of government are legitimate, or when the rule of law has been violated. In conceptual interpretation the distinction between author and interpreter vanishes: we have together created what we each and together interpret. Much of the long history of philosophy is a history of conceptual interpretation. Philosophers interpret the concepts they study in a much more self-conscious and professional way, but they also help in creating what they interpret.

The title for this section must sound odd. Of course we agree and disagree about morality and politics. We join campaigns because we agree and fight wars because we disagree. But pause to consider what makes this possible. Many words sound alike but have different meanings, and this linguistic fact can produce comically spurious agreement. If you and I agree to meet at the bank tomorrow and you mean the river’s edge but I mean the money store house, our agreement is illusory, as we will soon discover. We also seem to attach different meanings to the words we use to express moral concepts. When we think we disagree about whether a progressive income tax is unjust, for instance, it may turn out—it probably will turn out—that our tests for injustice are very different. I may think a law unjust if it disturbs the upshot of a free economic market and you if it increases overall suffering. Why is our apparent disagreement not then illusory like our supposed agreement in the bank case?

Types of Concepts

In this chapter I argue that we can account for genuine agreement and disagreement about moral issues only by distinguishing among types of the concepts that we use, separating them by identifying the different ways in which people share them. The moral and political concepts I just listed are all examples of a type I shall call “interpretive.” We share an interpretive concept when our collective behavior in using that concept is best explained by taking its correct use to depend on the best justification of the role it plays for us. I can best elaborate that complex idea by first trying to explain how we share concepts that are not interpretive: the concept of a bank, for instance, a book, an equilateral triangle, or a lion.

Some of our concepts are criterial in this sense: we share the concept when, but only so far as, we use the same criteria in identifying instances. People share the concept of an equilateral triangle, for example, when they all use a particular test—figures with three equal sides are equilateral triangles—to identify specimens. People who share a concept in this way may nevertheless fall into illusory disagreement about its proper use in some circumstances. The criteria we share for an equilateral triangle are precise, but those we share for applying other criterial concepts are not. If we seem to disagree about whether our mutual friend who is losing his hair is now bald, even though we agree about how much hair he actually has, our apparent disagreement is spurious—or, as we sometimes say, only verbal. Our apparent disagreement about how many books there are on a table is illusory if you count large pamphlets as books but I do not. The concepts of baldness and of a book, we may say, are vague criterial concepts because although people mainly agree about the correct criteria for their application, they differ over a range of application that each regards as marginal. It makes sense to say either that we share the concept in such cases because we use the same criteria in standard cases or that the concepts we use are only so slightly different that we should treat them as the same concept. The point is the same: it is the identity of our criteria that makes disagreement genuine when it is genuine.

However, we cannot account for the way all our concepts make agreement and disagreement possible by treating them all as criterial concepts. You and I disagree, say, about whether an animal we encounter in Piccadilly is a lion, and it turns out that I identify lions by their size and shape and you only by what you believe to be their distinctive behavior. I say the animal we have met is a lion because it looks like a lion, and you deny this because instead of roaring it speaks an accented English. We are using very different criteria and yet we really are disagreeing. We are not, as in the “bank” case, talking about entirely different things. Nor is our disagreement fake because the concept of a lion is vague. In the baldness case, once we understand that our criteria differ over some range and accept that this range counts for both of us as borderline, we agree that we are not really disagreeing.➀ But in the lion case, even after we understand that we use very different identifying criteria, we insist that our disagreement is genuine. We still disagree about whether that beast standing near the Ritz really is, as it looks to be, a lion.

Some concepts are not criterial concepts, we must say, but rather (as many philosophers now call them) “natural-kind” concepts.➁ We need not pause over the exact character of these concepts, about which philosophers disagree, but can say (very roughly though adequately for us now) that natural kinds are things that have a fixed identity in nature, such as a chemical compound or an animal species, and that people share a natural-kind concept when they use that concept to refer to the same natural kind. People can refer to the same natural kind even when they use, and know they do, different criteria to identify instances. You and I assume that “lion” names a distinct biological kind and that the beast we met is a lion if it has a lion’s biological essence, whatever that is, whether or not it meets the criteria either of us normally uses to identify lions. If you understand DNA, and if tests showed that the creature we saw had the DNA of a lion, you would likely change your opinion to recognize talking lions. Criterial concepts do not work that way: nothing you discovered about the molecular structure of my copy of Moby Dick could convince you that it was not a book.

We cannot take either criterial or natural-kind concepts to be only a special case of the other. There is no essential nature of baldness that finally determines who is bald in spite of appearances. We must accept what Wittgenstein pointed out: that concepts are tools and that we have different kinds of tools in our conceptual toolbox. However, criterial and natural-kind concepts do have something important in common. People do not share a concept of either kind unless they would accept a decisive test—a kind of decision procedure—for finally deciding when to apply the concept (except in cases they agree are marginal). Genuine disagreement about application is ruled out once all pertinent facts are agreed upon. We would not share the concept of a lion if we disagreed about the lionhood of an animal even when we agreed that it did or did not belong to the biological species historically designated as lions.

Does this condition for sharing a concept—that we share an idealized decision procedure for applying it—hold for all the concepts we share? The assumption that it does has dominated—and in my view spoiled—much recent philosophy of law.➂ In fact we must recognize at least one more family of concepts—a family that we share in spite of not agreeing about a decisive test. These are our interpretive concepts.➃ We share these concepts, as I said, not because we agree in their application once all other pertinent facts are agreed upon, but rather by manifesting an understanding that their correct application is fixed by the best interpretation of the practices in which they figure. I must explain this further.

Interpretive Concepts (160)

Paradigms

People participate in social practices in which they treat certain concepts as identifying a value or disvalue but disagree about how that value should be characterized or identified. The concept of justice and other moral concepts work in that way for us. We agree—mainly—that these are values, but we do not agree about the precise character of these values. We do not agree about what makes an act just or unjust, right or wrong, an invasion of liberty or an act of tactlessness. Nor do we agree about what response, if any, would be required or justified by a correct attribution of the concept. But we agree sufficiently about what we take to be paradigm instances of the concept, and paradigm cases of appropriate reactions to those instances, to permit us to argue, in a way intelligible to others who share the concept with us, that a particular characterization of the value or disvalue best justifies these shared paradigms.➄

We agree, for instance, in spite of great disagreements in other areas, that it would be unjust for government to tax wealth produced by the industrious poor for the sole benefit of the lazy rich or to convict and punish someone known to be innocent of any crime. We agree sufficiently about such paradigms to permit each of us to propose a theory or conception of justice that justifies the judgments we make in those paradigms, one that others can recognize as a theory or conception of that concept. Because these theories are different, and may be strikingly different, the attributions they license beyond the paradigms are different. Sharing an interpretive concept does depend, as sharing criterial and natural-kind concepts depends, on agreement. But the kind of agreement that is required in the case of an interpretive concept is very different: it is not agreement on a decision procedure as a decisive test for instances. On the contrary, sharing an interpretive concept is consistent with very great and entirely intractable differences of opinion about instances. It is also consistent with some people who share the concept denying that it expresses any value at all. Someone who declares that there is no value in what is expressed by a certain concept—chastity, perhaps, or etiquette or patriotism—must suppose ample agreement on paradigms of that concept among those who do count it as valuable. Otherwise his debunking argument could not take hold.

It would be a mistake to try to make this general account of interpretive concepts more precise: we cannot say just how much or what detail of agreement about paradigms is required in a particular community to justify treating a concept as interpretive for that community. It is in each case itself an interpretive question whether we make more sense of how the concept functions there on that assumption than we do on any competing assumption that declares agreement or disagreement spurious. (It is at least an open interpretive question, for example, whether the concept of democracy alive in the rhetoric of liberal societies is the same concept as the one deployed in so-called people’s democracies.) The question always remains, in spite of even very radical disagreement, whether the pattern of that disagreement is better explained by the hypothesis that those who disagree share a single interpretive concept and disagree about its character, or by the alternative hypothesis that the disagreement is illusory like our agreement to meet at the bank. We noticed in Chapter 7 that the first stage in collaborative or explanatory interpretation is the identification of a genre to which an interpretive question belongs. There is a parallel basic stage in conceptual interpretation: treating a concept as interpretive supposes that this way of understanding a practice better interprets that practice than a rival interpretation that makes apparent agreement or disagreement spurious. Here too interpretation is interpretive all the way down.

There seems no doubt which of the alternative assumptions—shared interpretive concept or spurious disagreement—is more persuasive in the case of justice. We fight campaigns, even wars, about justice, and it is obviously false that if we only reflected on what we mean by the term, we would see that we really had nothing to disagree about. Because we share the interpretive concept of justice, we can recognize the theories of a great variety of political philosophers as competing conceptions of that concept. Utilitarian and other consequentialist philosophers interpret the practices in which claims of justice figure by supposing those practices to aim at the general happiness or some other desirable goal. Political philosophers in the Kantian tradition offer very different interpretations. Few of the politicians who argue about universal health care are sophisticated political philosophers, nor are their arguments self-consciously interpretive. But we can reconstruct their arguments by identifying theories of justice that each, on inspection, can be seen to exhibit and treating these theories as interpretations of the shared practices of calling institutions, people, and actions just and unjust. If we could not do this, we would have to accept what seems ludicrous: that the most fervent and passionate of our political arguments are just silly misunderstandings.

But can interpretive arguments about justice escape a narrow circularity? It was relatively easy to illustrate the value account of interpretation in Chapter 7 because the objects of interpretation we considered there—a poem or statute or an epoch—are not themselves values. There is no circularity in interpreting a statute by supposing it to serve the value of equality. But moral concepts themselves designate values. How can someone identify the value latent in the practices of justice without appealing, unhelpfully, to the concept of justice itself? I anticipated an answer in the discussion of moral responsibility in Chapter 6. We defend a conception of justice by placing the practices and paradigms of that concept in a larger network of other values that sustains our conception. We can in principle continue this expansion of our argument, exploring other values until, as I said, the argument meets itself. The circularity, if any, is global across the whole domain of value. That is the method of formal moral and political philosophy: the method of the social contract or the ideal observer, for example. At the end of this chapter I offer a more extended example in the moral and political theories of Plato and Aristotle. But what I hope will prove the most convincing illustration lies further on, in the later parts of the book—in particular in the analysis of moral concepts that begins in Chapter 11 and of political concepts beginning in Chapter 15. The idea of interpretive concepts plays an important and obvious role, that is, in the overall theme of this book: the unity of value.

Concepts and Usage

Though the distinctions we draw among criterial, natural-kind, and interpretive concepts are justified by usage—by the way people use and respond to concepts—these distinctions are interpretations of usage, not themselves part of usage. Few people who use the concept of democracy would agree that what a democracy is depends on which political theory provides the best justification of paradigms of the concept. Most would insist that they rely on a criterial or commonsense account of the matter, or none at all. But we nevertheless need the idea of an interpretive concept to explain their behavior: why they support or oppose theories of democracy in the way they do, and why their agreements and disagreements about whether particular governments are democracies are genuine, as they certainly suppose them to be. People are not always or even often aware of the buried theoretical structure needed to justify the rest of what they think.

Nor do I suppose that people who talk about books, lions, and justice understand that they are using different kinds of concepts. They need not—and most of them do not—have the concept of a concept at all, let alone the concept of a type of concept, let alone the concept of a criterial, natural-kind, or interpretive concept. These are philosophers’ ideas: they are not recognized in practice but justified by their role in making sense of practice. Our account of the concepts that structure an intellectual domain is itself an interpretation of that domain, a device for making sense of the inquiry, reflection, arguments, and strategies that mark the domain. So in one sense all concepts are interpretive: because we must interpret the practice of “baldness” to decide that that concept is both criterial and vague, we might say that it is an interpretive fact that it is both.➅ The concepts I call interpretive concepts are interpretive not just in that sense, however, but in the further sense that people who use them are best understood as interpreting the practices in which they figure. There is enough leeway in this description, as I said, to allow for hard cases when it might be thought uncertain or even indeterminate whether a group agrees sufficiently about the paradigms to allow us to say that its members share a particular interpretive concept.

If most people do not understand what an interpretive concept is, why is it important nevertheless to insist that the concepts they use are interpretive? Part of the answer is explicit in what I have so far many times said: we want to understand as well as describe how and why people disagree and argue. We want to see whether their disagreements are genuine. But we also need to recognize interpretive concepts to guide our own arguments. Most of the rest of this book explores interpretive concepts. Understanding what kind of concepts these are, and what kinds of argument we therefore need, will help us construct and test conceptions of judgmental responsibility, a good life, moral obligation, human rights, liberty, equality, democracy, and law. It will also help us explain why the best conception of each of these concepts must both draw on and contribute to conceptions of the rest of them.

When Concepts Migrate

Because the assignment of any particular concept to one of the types we have distinguished is an interpretive conclusion, it need not hold for all uses of what seems the same concept. In most circumstances it would be bizarre to treat the concept of a book as other than a criterial concept. We would treat almost any disagreement about whether to count a flat-backed pamphlet as a book, however heated, as a silly, verbal disagreement rather than as a deep disagreement about the best interpretation of the practices in which the concept of a book figures. In some circumstances, however, a novel interpretation of a normally criterial concept would be appropriate, and indeed necessary, because in these circumstances the concept does function not as criterial but as interpretive. Imagine a statute declaring that bald men are entitled to a special income tax exemption. This silly statute would convert the question of baldness into a genuine interpretive issue: officials, lawyers, and judges would have to contrive some highly artificial definition of baldness (not necessarily a hair-counting definition) by asking which such definition would make most political sense of the exemption. Less silly examples are more plausible: a statute exempting books from sales or value-added tax but leaving “book” undefined, for instance. Concepts that are normally criterial often become interpretive when embedded in law in that way.➆

In some circumstances, moreover, we must treat concepts that normally function as natural-kind concepts, not as interpretive because they do not house values, but rather as up for grabs in a different way. It seems settled now—no other assumption makes sense of our practices—that animal and mineral species are fixed by the most basic biological or chemical properties of these natural kinds: the animal’s DNA and the metal’s molecular structure. If I insist that some animal before us is a small lion rather than a very large pussy cat, even after I had grasped genetics and learned that the beast had the DNA of a cat, this would show either that I had misunderstood what a lion is or that you and I appeal to different concepts when we speak of a “lion.” But the assumptions that DNA and molecular composition are decisive of an animal or metallic kind is a scientific achievement and, in the case of DNA, a relatively recent one. Experts treat these properties as settling issues of application because DNA or molecular structure provides the most comprehensive available explanation of a natural kind’s other features, including its appearance.➇ In that way they explain why the differing criteria that people use to identify instances do pick out the same animals or metals.

But we can imagine further scientific discoveries that might disturb that assumption. Imagine that a newly invented form of radiation changes an animal’s cells, not just randomly but into those produced by the DNA of a different animal. Zoologists would then have to choose between two ways of reporting this phenomenon: they might assume that an animal’s species is fixed by the DNA it inherits from its parents, so that this form of radiation changes a lion’s DNA, or that an animal’s species is fixed by its DNA from time to time, so that the radiation turns lions into cats. Scientists might divide, at least for a time, in their choices and therefore in their opinions about which beasts are lions. If their arguments then took the form of a debate about the most useful way of continuing the established classificatory practices of zoology, we might well say that the concept of a lion had become for a time something like an interpretive rather than a natural-kind concept.

Criterial concepts can be up for grabs too. Consider the recent reformulation of the concept of a planet in a world congress of astronomers.➈ That concept is ordinarily criterial—planets are not natural kinds. So whether to call Pluto a planet might be treated as a borderline issue to be decided by arbitrary fiat and perhaps decided differently by different astronomers. But the settled practice of calling it a planet collided with the discovery that consistency would then require calling many insignificant solar system residents planets as well. The astronomers therefore adopted a legislative attitude—which conception of planethood would best fit the uses astronomers make of the distinction between planets and other bodies?—and spent a week debating that issue under the world’s gaze with headlines daily declaring shifts in position and no doubt bookmakers setting odds on Pluto’s fate. Finally Pluto was demoted, with various results including my consequent demotion as an astronomer in the eyes of my grandson. The concept of a planet is now, with a shiny new set of criteria, a criterial concept again. But it passed through, as we might put it, a brief different phase.

Moral Concepts

Moral concepts are interpretive concepts. That claim has great significance for moral and political philosophy. It offers to explain, for example, why the popular idea is mistaken that philosophers can provide an “analysis” of justice or liberty or morality or courage or law that is neutral about the substantive value or importance of these ideals. It supports the opinion I offered that “meta-ethics” is a misconceived project. It would therefore be wise to consider at some length how this strong claim might be resisted.

Politicians and philosophers disagree about instances of injustice. They do not think that questions like whether a progressive income tax is unjust are peripheral or borderline like the question whether some balding man is yet bald. One side takes the progressive income tax to be a firm requirement of justice, while the other calls it plainly unjust. They have no temptation to accept, once they see how different their criteria are, that their disagreement is not genuine. So it seems plausible, as an interpretive conclusion, to suppose that justice and other moral concepts are interpretive.

It might be objected, however, that in spite of these surface facts justice is nevertheless a criterial concept because people do agree at some high level of abstraction about the right criteria. But at how high a level? In his treatise John Rawls says that people who disagree about justice nevertheless “agree that institutions are just when no arbitrary distinctions are made between persons in the assigning of basic rights and duties and when the rules determine a proper balance between competing claims to the advantages of social life.”➉ It is far from plain, however, that people do agree on criteria even at that very abstract level. It is a popular view in some parts of the world, for instance, that political institutions are unjust when they fail to respect God by providing authority and preference to his priests. That opinion objects not when arbitrary distinctions are made but when necessary ones are not made, and the complaint contains no claim about the proper distribution of advantages created by social life.

It is unclear that we can find any form of words, however abstract, that describes a consensus among those we take to share the concept of justice. But even if we could, that consensus would not describe a decision procedure for identifying justice or injustice. On the contrary, it would simply point to further apparent disagreements, whose nature as genuine disagreements would then have to be explained. If we accepted Rawls’s suggestion, for instance, we would have to identify criteria that people who disagree about justice all accept for determining which distinctions are “arbitrary” and what is a “proper” balance of advantages. There are no such criteria.

We might try a different tack. We might say that people who disagree about justice actually do share criteria of application, because they agree about the connections between justice and more basic moral judgment. Disagreements about what is just and unjust, we might say, are really disagreements about what kinds of political institutions are good or bad, or about how officials or other people ought or ought not to behave. On this view, we could actually do without the concept of justice and argue directly about which institutions ought or ought not to be established or, if they exist, ought or ought not to be dismantled. One difficulty with this solution is evident: people have reasons for thinking that institutions ought or ought not to exist that are not reasons of justice. So we cannot treat every argument about whether officials ought to abolish the progressive income tax as an argument about the justice of that institution, and it is far from plain that we can explain what is distinctive about the particular arguments we have in mind without reintroducing the concept of justice. On the contrary, it seems impossible to do that. But there is an even more fundamental and pertinent difficulty: the strategy begs the central question, because it assumes that the very abstract moral concepts of goodness, badness, duty, and what ought or ought not be done are themselves criterial concepts.

So let us set complex moral concepts like justice aside for the moment and ask whether any of our moral concepts, including the most general and abstract among them, can be understood as criterial. On first appearances none can. People who disagree about what is good or about what ought to happen plainly do not share decisive criteria for settling those disagreements.⑪ Can we say that these concepts are nevertheless criterial because people do agree that something ought to be done whenever there is an authoritative or categorical reason for doing it? No, this only pushes the problem back further—and not much further at that. People disagree about the right criteria for deciding when something is a categorical or authoritative reason for action. Nor would it help to try to specify shared criteria through consequences: to say, for instance, that people share the concept of goodness because they agree that something that is good is to be promoted or protected. Or that if some action is wrong then anyone who acts that way should be criticized or punished. People do not even agree on those propositions—any apparent agreement disappears when we ask what kind of promotion or protection or criticism or punishment is called for—and of course people do not share criteria for deciding what ought to be protected or promoted or punished. Moreover, there are many reasons for promoting something other than its goodness and for criticizing someone other than for his badness; as in the case of justice, there is no way to specify what is distinctive to moral reasons for promotion or criticism without using a moral vocabulary.

It seems hopeless, then, to try to account for agreement or disagreement about what is right or good by treating these concepts as criterial. However, we have noticed another possibility: perhaps we can treat these abstract concepts as natural-kind rather than criterial concepts. Let me explain. Some moral philosophers believe that there is a distinct property of goodness—a property that figures in what they call the actual inventory of the universe—and that moral argument is therefore about where this distinct property is to be found. Some of them suppose this to be a “non-natural” property—a matter of morons—that at least some human beings can perceive through a faculty of intuition. Others that it is a “natural” property that we perceive in the ordinary way. I gave my reasons for rejecting both these views, and the causal impact hypothesis on which they rest, in Chapter 4, but it might be helpful to return to the issues they raise.

Both versions treat moral concepts as in effect natural-kind concepts. On that view, goodness is like lionhood. We say that a particular animal is (or is not) a lion because it has (or does not have) the property (whatever it is) that provides the essential nature of a lion. Most people who say this have no idea what that property is and therefore may disagree about whether some animal is a lion. So, on this new story, people may sensibly say that capitalism is (or is not) good because it has (or does not have) the property (whatever it is) that provides the essence of the natural or non-natural property of goodness. People who say this will disagree about what that essence is. They disagree about whether it is a natural or non-natural property and, if the former, what natural property it is. But that does not mean, according to this new strategy, that their disagreement about the goodness of capitalism is not genuine.

The new strategy fails, however, because people can share a natural-kind concept only when they largely agree about which objects fall under that concept. Suppose you and I agreed that there is some essential property that defines which animal is a lion but disagreed not only about what that essential property is but also and consistently about which of the animals in our zoos and picture books are lions. That would suggest that we use “lion” to refer to entirely different animals and that our disagreement about the beast in Piccadilly is spurious after all. Our disagreement about a particular case is real only if we otherwise agree, by and large, when we are called on to identify lions. Philosophers of language explain this phenomenon historically: history has attached the name “lion” to a particular zoological kind, so that when people suppose that “it” has an essential nature, they refer to the animal kind people have called by that name.⑫ This explanation presupposes convergence, not in criteria but in instances: though people may use different criteria in deciding what is a lion, they mainly all agree, at least after the other pertinent facts are known, about which animals are lions. But we don’t mainly and consistently agree on which objects or people are good or which acts are wrong. Far from it. There is sufficient agreement about paradigms to allow us to say that these moral concepts are shared. But that minimal agreement leaves legions of crucial cases in which disagreement persists even after all other pertinent fact are agreed upon.

We must accept, then, that moral concepts are interpretive. But here is one final attempt to avoid that conclusion. “We should understand the very abstract vocabulary of morals—the concepts of goodness and of what we ought to do—as primitive concepts, concepts that cannot be defined in terms of something else. We all know very well what it means to say that something is good or right or that someone ought to do something, even though we cannot define these concepts by setting out tests on which we all agree. Just as we all know what we mean by yellow, and can therefore disagree about which fruits are yellow, so we all know what we mean when we say that something is good, and can therefore disagree about whether the triumph of capitalism is good.” That final argument also fails. Of course we all know what we mean when we say that something is good or ought to be done. Our question is: what makes it true that we all mean the same thing? It is not enough to say that we all think we do. We must explain how we can be right. We suppose we mean the same thing by “yellow” because the objects we identify as yellow are the same objects, and when we disagree we think we can explain why by calling attention to light or perceptual apparatus. But that is not true in the case of moral concepts. I should add that because moral concepts are interpretive it is a mistake to say that they cannot be defined. Moral and political philosophy, as we shall see, is in large part an effort to define them. We should rather say that because any definition of a moral concept is a piece of moral interpretation, any helpful definition will inevitably be controversial.

Relativism? (170)

Do these arguments threaten a new relativism? The practices that employ the concepts of justice, honesty, and the other concepts I called interpretive vary from place to place. We count racial or gender discrimination as a paradigm example of injustice; other cultures think that justice permits or indeed even requires such discrimination. Does it not follow that the best interpretation of these practices would vary correspondingly, so that the best conception of what justice requires in Toledo might not be the best conception in Tehran? We might worry that if justice is interpretive, someone in a culture that practices systematic discrimination against women makes no mistake when he says that such discrimination is not unjust. His interpretation, we might think, is correct for the practices of his community. Parallels with legal practice might seem to suggest this. Legal practice is different in different political communities, and so, of course, are people’s legal rights and duties. If justice is an interpretive concept, why should this not also be true about justice?

We have an antecedent problem even in understanding this threat. Why should we assume that the various practices that differ so much around the world are all practices built around the same concept—the concept of justice? In most of these places the English word “justice” is not used; we suppose that the practices of people there are practices of justice because we suppose that some word they use invokes the value we use that word to invoke. (Even if they do use a word that sounds like “justice,” we make the same assumption, of course.) But if those practices are really so different, what justifies that piece of translation? Why should we not say, rather, that they do not have the concept of justice at all?

So the threat presupposes enough structural similarity to justify the assumption that their concept is our concept. They must call many acts we judge unjust by the word we translate as “unjust,” and they must suppose that their designation has sufficiently similar consequences to those we recognize when we call something unjust. Otherwise our translation would be mistaken. (Compare the discussion of radical translation in Chapter 7.) Those structural similarities, which we need to notice even to pose the threat, also dissolve it. We can count a great proportion of the substantive claims other cultures make about justice as mistakes; we do this when we suppose that the best available justification of the paradigms of attribution and response we share justifies rejecting those claims. We must judge for ourselves what justification of these shared paradigms and structures is adequate, and no justification that approved gender discrimination would be. They share the concept of justice with us, but—at least so we can sensibly suppose—they misunderstand that concept profoundly. There is no relativism in this story, only error on their part.

What if our translation exercise fails? We find no word in some linguistic community that we can sensibly translate as “justice,” and we conclude that that community does not have the concept. It remains true that their behavior may be deeply unjust: acting unjustly does not require having the concept of justice. There is no relativism in this different story either.

Why is law different? Why do we not say that nations that have adopted zoning regulations different from ours have misunderstood the concept of law, so that, contrary to what they think, it is actually illegal to tear down Georgian buildings there as well as here? Because any plausible conceptions of law and of justice must suppose that local decisions have a force in fixing what law requires that they do not have in fixing what is just or unjust. Different legal theories understand the force of local decisions differently; but any competent theory assigns such decisions much greater force in law than in morality. Even when we understand that law is a branch of morality—that is what I argue in Chapter 19—we must accept this indispensable distinction between that branch and the rest of the domain.

Truth (172)

Disagreement about Truth

I suggested that many of the concepts that occupy philosophers—not just moral and political concepts, but concepts that challenge philosophers in other ways—are best treated as interpretive concepts. Disputes about the concept of truth seem perennial among philosophers. Is that concept, as it figures in their theories and controversies, an interpretive concept? We certainly disagree about what truth is and about what is true. Some of these disagreements are philosophical: I disagree with some external skeptics about whether moral judgments can be true. And of course people disagree about truth in thousands of more mundane ways all the time: about whether it is true that Cleopatra slept with Caesar or that our universe started with a big bang or that Glendower was a fool or that the Iraq invasion was immoral. If these various philosophical and more mundane disagreements are genuine, as they certainly seem to be, then people, including philosophers, must share a concept of truth. But do they? How?

It is high time I raised these questions. In Part One I argued that moral claims can be objectively true. In this part I have argued, more generally, that interpretive judgments can be true. I tried to state the truth conditions of interpretive judgments and how these differ from the truth conditions of scientific claims. Truth has been my subject all along. But if external skeptics and I do not share a concept of truth, then these long discussions have been silly, as illusory as the pseudo-agreement we had about the bank. In Chapter 7 I said that those who balk at calling interpretive judgments “true” could substitute some other word—perhaps “most reasonable” or “most acceptable.” But am I entitled to say that they would be using the same concept?

It is now a popular view that truth is a primitive idea that cannot be defined.⑬ But (as we saw in the case of goodness) that is not a helpful response to these questions. We need to ask whether philosophers and other people share the same primitive concept. They do not share criteria for applying the concept: for deciding whether “true” is properly used of propositions in some particular domain like morality or mathematics. They might agree on what Crispin Wright has called “platitudes” about truth: that the proposition that snow is white is true only if snow is white, for instance, or that a proposition is true if it accurately reports the facts of the matter.⑭ But these platitudes do not yield decision procedures for answering the questions they ask. Philosophers do not agree about what kinds of facts there are.

I distinguished, a moment ago, mundane from philosophical uses of the concept of truth. If we look only at the former, we might be tempted by what has been called the “deflationary” theory of truth.⑮ This holds, roughly, that to claim that a proposition is true is just to repeat the proposition. Calling it true that Sam is bald or that water flows downhill or that gratuitous torture is bad is just saying that Sam is bald, that water flows downhill, or that gratuitous torture is bad. So we might say that in such contexts truth functions as a criterial concept, because we all agree on a decision procedure: that if things are as a statement asserts them to be, then it is correct to call that statement true. The concepts we use in stating how things are may themselves be criterial or natural-kind or interpretive concepts: all three occur in those examples. But truth itself, we might think, remains criterial.

We cannot, however, take this view of the concept of truth as it appears in philosophical controversies about truth—for example, in the controversy about whether moral claims can be true (or, indeed, whether the deflationary theory of truth is correct). In the mundane use, any worry about the nature of truth disappears once we understand its redundancy. We needn’t worry about what truth is: we are concerned only with Sam’s scalp, water’s behavior, and whether gratuitous torture is bad. But in philosophical contexts truth remains the focus of attention: we cannot transfer our concern about its nature to concern about something else. It is correct, but wholly unhelpful, to say that the sentence “Moral judgments can be true” is true if and only if moral judgments can be true. The fact remains that philosophers disagree about whether moral judgments can be true because they disagree about what truth is.

We can rescue philosophical arguments about the nature of truth if we can understand truth as an interpretive concept. We should reformulate the different theories of truth that philosophers have proposed, so far as we can, by treating them as interpretive claims. We share a vast variety of practices in which the pursuit and achievement of truth are treated as values. We do not invariably count it good to speak or even to know the truth, but it is our standard assumption that both are good. The value of truth is interwoven in these practices with a variety of other values that Bernard Williams called, comprehensively, the values of truthfulness.⑯ These include accuracy, responsibility, sincerity, and authenticity. Truth is also interwoven with a variety of other kinds of concepts: conspicuously the concept of reality, but also the concepts of belief, investigation, inquiry, assertion, argument, cognition, proposition, assertion, statement, and sentence. We must interpret all these concepts—the entire family of truth concepts—together, trying to find a conception of each that makes sense given its relations with the others and given standard assumptions about the values of truth and truthfulness.

The familiar philosophical theories of truth should therefore be judged by asking how well they interpret this great network of concepts and practices taken together. The once-popular correspondence theory, for example, should be seen as an attempt to construct interwoven conceptions of correspondence and reality such that it makes substantial interpretive—not just platitudinous—sense to treat truth as correspondence with reality. If successful, that interpretation of these concepts would provide a successful interpretation of the other truthfulness concepts as well: it would sustain Williams’s accounts of the value of sincerity, for instance. If suitably elaborated it would also make good sense of the familiar and intuitive connection between truth and causation in the domains to which it applied: that the proposition that Jupiter is the largest planet is true not just if, but because, Jupiter is the largest planet.

However, the project of connecting truth with correspondence has proved difficult. Ingenuity is required, for example, to show that there is something in reality to which a negative proposition (that Caesar did not dine with Casca on his last night) or a complex proposition (if Caesar had dined with Casca, he would have discovered the conspiracy) might be thought to correspond. It has also proved difficult, moreover, to specify any substantial and appropriate sense of correspondence. How can propositions be thought to correspond with anything?

But for now assume (just as an illustration, and not because we believe it) that these problems have been or can be solved.⑰ Assume that philosophers can produce conceptions of correspondence and reality that generate something in reality to which propositions, including negative and complex propositions, can be said to correspond. We then face the following important interpretive question. Should we take the best correspondence theory (whatever it turns out to be) to exhaust the concept of truth? Or should we take the best such theory to be the upshot of applying to science (or some other particular domain of inquiry) a yet more abstract interpretation of the truth concepts and practices? A yet more abstract interpretation whose application to other domains, like mathematics or morality, might yield not a correspondence theory but a very different theory for that domain?

We faced a parallel question in Chapter 7 when we discussed the popular psychological state theory of interpretation. I distinguished two views. The first holds that this popular theory exhausts interpretation, so that truth in interpretation is always just a matter of correspondence with some psychological state, like the intention of a poet or lawmaker. It would follow that no claim could be said to be true when, as often occurs in interpretive genres like law and history, there is no psychological state that can make it true. The second, rival, view argues that the psychological state theory holds only for certain particular genres of collaborative interpretation, like conversational interpretation; it holds for those genres in virtue of the application to them of a more abstract account—I called this the value account—that fits a broader range of genres as well. I argued for the second view. The psychological state account is illuminating for some genres but misplaced in others, and the more abstract value account explains which and why.

I mean now to press the same distinction about theories of truth. We might, first, take the correspondence theory of truth (or some rival like a coherence theory) to exhaust the concept of truth—to state conditions that any kind of judgment in any domain must meet if it is to count as true. We would then demote as not “truth-apt” any domain of apparent intellectual activity in which the chosen exclusive conception of truth has no application; this might be, for instance, mathematics or morality. Or we might, second, try to formulate some very abstract concept of truth, and of the associated ideas of reality, objectivity, responsibility, sincerity, and the rest, that would allow us to construct different less abstract theories as candidates for explaining truth in, the different domains in which claims of truth play a role.

If we took up the second strategy, we would treat the various theories of truth that philosophers have proposed, including the redundancy, correspondence, coherence, and pragmatist theories, as attempts to apply some more abstract account of truth to some particular domain or domains, just as we treat the author’s intention theory as a candidate for a theory of interpretive truth in some genres rather than across all genres of interpretation. A truth theorist might then claim that his favored theory supplies the best application of that more abstract theory to one particular domain, such as science, without thereby claiming that the same theory is also successful as an application of that abstract idea of truth to other domains.

The first, monolithic strategy has been popular. Philosophers have offered theories of truth that seem to fit science well and then declared morality, for instance, not to be truth-apt because it is not truth-apt on that theory. In Part One we discovered a fatal difficulty in that strategy. We cannot understand the thesis that it is not true that torture is wrong as other than a denial that torture is wrong, which itself claims not just truth-aptness but truth for a moral judgment. Nor can we understand the more contorted and mysterious thesis that it is neither true nor false that torture is wrong other than as claiming truth for the moral judgment that those who believe that torture is wrong are wrong. We considered and dismissed various ways of avoiding that paradox. We noticed apparently more sophisticated versions of skepticism, including what I called the two-language-games strategy. But these founder because they leave themselves no space in which to deny that any discourse is really (or fundamentally, or at the explanatory or philosophical level) not suitable for truth. So the first of the two strategies for truth theories ends in failure.

We must take up the second strategy. This has obvious initial advantages. It fits a much broader range of the practices in which the concepts of truth and truthfulness now play an important role. The brigade of virtues collected in the idea of truthfulness—sincerity, authenticity, intellectual responsibility, and the rest—is not limited to the domains of physical science and psychology. These virtues are equally important in morality, law, and other genres of interpretation. The first strategy is therefore committed to what seems bad interpretive strategy: seeking an interpretation that ignores from the start vast parts of the interpretive data. The second strategy begins, on the contrary, by noticing all the data.

We would make a more convincing case for the second strategy, however, if we could set out a very abstract, highest-level account of truth that we might think holds for all the genres—of science, mathematics, philosophy, and value—in which claims of truth are standard. Perhaps that would not be absolutely necessary. We might perhaps study truth as a wide-ranging interpretive concept just by attending to its various paradigms in different domains without any overall abstract formulation. I defended that possibility in the case of justice earlier in this chapter. Still, it would be helpful to find some very abstract statement of the concept of truth, some formulation that is independent of any intellectual domain and explains why the different standards for pursuing truth in different domains are nevertheless all standards for pursuing truth.

That statement would have to be even more abstract than the value theory of interpretation discussed in Chapter 7, because the latter theory, which is a theory of truth in interpretation, would then have to be seen as itself an application of an even more abstract theory of truth to the entire domain of interpretation. That supremely abstract theory of truth could not be wholly formal or platitudinous, however. If we can formulate such a theory at all, it would have work to do: it would have to fit and justify our truth-seeking practices and the allied practices of truthfulness across all domains. That is a tall order, and I do not know how to satisfy it.

Here is one tentative and incomplete suggestion. We might build a suitable supremely abstract theory by taking inquiry and truth to be paired and interwoven concepts, so that we can usefully characterize truth, as I did in the last chapter, as the intrinsic goal of inquiry. We could offer, as our most abstract characterization, that truth is what counts as the uniquely successful solution to a challenge of inquiry. We could then construct more concrete specifications of truth for different domains by finding more concrete accounts of success tailored to each domain.⑱ These different accounts would be nested. The value theory would be a candidate account for success across the whole domain of interpretation, and the theory of moral responsibility I described in Chapter 6 would be a candidate application of the value theory to the more specific interpretive domain of morality. A different account of success, and hence truth, would be offered for science. The distinction Chapter 7 offered—that investigative success must be defined by purpose in interpretation but must be divorced from purpose in science—would distinguish conceptions of truth at a very abstract level, but these would both be conceptions of truth viewed from the most abstract level.

These sketchy remarks are reminiscent, at least, of much of what Charles Saunders Peirce said about truth.⑲ But we must not say, as Peirce once said, that truth is always or just what enables us to satisfy some desire we have.⑳ That is correct in some cases—when the question we take up is the question of what will satisfy us—but not generally. His statement was ill-advised because it misidentifies the level of his pragmatism. It treats his pragmatism as a theory of truth competitive with a correspondence, coherence, interpretive, or some other kind of theory; his pragmatism seems better understood as a more abstract directive about how to decide which other more particular such theory is right for some particular domain. That reading draws the sting of an old joke: that the trouble with pragmatism is that it doesn’t work. In Peirce’s hands, at least, it was meant to “work” not by itself, but only by recommending to us some other, distinctly not pragmatic, less abstract theory. In any case, the practices that make the truth concepts valuable in science rule out, decisively, any suggestion that what is true in science is what is useful—or delightful or intriguing or ironic. It is an important human achievement to have recognized this.

Skepticism Again

If we are to pursue some such suggestion, we must be able to treat the various forms of internal skepticism, including the indeterminacies I described in Chapter 5, as also uniquely successful solutions to challenges of inquiry. I said there that (in my tentative opinion) claims about the relative superiority of great artists working in very different genres at very different times are misjudged; according to the best account of artistic value, I said, no such claim, including the claim that these great artists were of equal worth, can be sustained. That is internal skepticism because it relies on a positive theory of artistic value. We might take something of the same view about the concept of humor. We might find it ludicrous that something could be really funny though it never produced even a tinge of amusement. We might conclude that it would be a mistake to claim objective truth for ascriptions of humor.㉑

We must now consider how such internal skepticism sorts with the supremely abstract theory of truth I just sketched. We take at face value claims of truth in all the domains in which such claims are familiar; we then ask, as an initial question, whether a particular domain can be understood as organized around inquiry. If so, we then consider whether the best theory of success in that inquiry supports the assumption, either in general or over some part or aspect of the practice, that no uniquely successful culmination of that inquiry exists. We treat that question as substantive within the area of inquiry, and the skepticism at stake is therefore only internal skepticism. I offered this example in the last chapter. A director contemplates a new production of Hamlet. He might ask: Which interpretation of the play as a whole and of each speech should guide any production of the play anytime, anywhere? Or he might ask: Given my own reactions to the play, the cast and funding I have available, the time and place in which I work, and recent productions of the play around here, which interpretation should guide me now? In my own view, for reasons I offered in that chapter, the best theory about the proper goals of a fresh production of a classic shows that there is no uniquely right answer to the first of these questions. But that same theory might hold that there is indeed a uniquely right answer to the second question, even though our director is entirely uncertain what that right answer is. Of course, I might be wrong in my view about the proper goals of a new production of a classic, in which case my views about right answers would be wrong as well. Everything is substantive here, and everything is therefore in play.

Truth and Method

Our approach is different in another crucial respect. More conventional accounts draw a sharp line between theories of truth, which are meant to hold across all domains, and theories of proper investigative methodology, which must of course differ according to subject matter. Our approach recognizes, on the contrary, only differences of degree in abstraction between the two kinds of theory. We begin with a near-formal and supremely abstract account of the concept of truth—unique success in inquiry, for instance. When we apply that near-formal account of truth to specific domains, we produce more concrete theories, and these merge through further specification into discrete methodological manuals for each domain and subdomain. If, for instance, we take some form of correspondence theory to be the more concrete upshot of applying that very abstract formulation to the physical sciences, that more concrete theory would already supply the rudiments of a theory of scientific method: limiting evidence for propositions about the physical world to what can plausibly be thought to be caused directly or indirectly by facts that would make those propositions true, for instance. Each more detailed account or specification of scientific method—a special theory for particle physics or for the biological sciences, for example—would also be a more detailed specification of a theory of truth.

That progression from truth to method holds equally for the domains of interpretation. There is no sharp break, but only a difference in degree of abstraction, between a theory of truth for some interpretive genre and a more detailed theory defending some claim about sound method in that genre. A psychological state theory of truth in literary interpretation is a more abstract version of some particular critic’s view about how to read Among School Children. In Chapter 6 I emphasized the distinction between moral truth and moral responsibility. But I also said that the interpretive reasoning required for moral responsibility is our best hope for achieving moral truth. I can now put the connection rather differently. Our theory of moral responsibility must be an appropriately concrete specification of our theory of moral truth, and any skepticism about the possibility of truth for some class of moral judgment must be secured through the exercise of moral responsibility. That is just another way of rehearsing what is by now a familiar song in these pages. Any genuine moral skepticism must be an internal skepticism. But now we reach that conclusion in a different way: through a study of the best conception, for morality, of what truth is.

Nothing in this argument even hints that truth is ever up to us. That is already ruled out by the most abstract formulation of truth as success in inquiry. There is nothing optional or pale or minimal or quietist in the kind of truth we claim for either domain. Nor are we talking past one another in our philosophical arguments over truth. We really do disagree.

At least since Plato identified the problem in the Meno, philosophers have worried about what they call the paradox of analysis. They set out to analyze familiar concepts—truth, causation, justice, and the rest—by telling us what each means. But if they succeed, then, because these are our concepts, they tell only what we already know. It follows that if an analysis is correct, it is uninformative. The idea of interpretive concepts dissolves the paradox. A successful conception of an interpretive concept is indeed something new.㉒

Thin and Thick Concepts (180)

We return to the main argument. I said that moral concepts such as those of justice, honesty, treachery, and friendship are interpretive: we account for agreement and disagreement about cases not by finding shared criteria of application but by supposing shared practices in which these concepts figure. We develop conceptions of these concepts through interpretation. We suppose that even the most abstract moral concepts—the concept of what is good and of what we ought to do—are interpretive: we have no other way of explaining how disputes about what is good or right are genuine.

But the idea of interpretation might not seem easily to fit these very abstract moral concepts. It makes evident sense to treat our disagreements about friendship—whether someone should be criticized for giving the police incriminating evidence about a friend—as reflecting different interpretations of friendship. It seems odd to think of goodness and duty that way, however: odd to think that an argument about whether we have an obligation to help people in poverty is an argument about the best interpretation of what obligation is. The difference reflects the fact that when we disagree about the application of very abstract moral concepts—about what someone ought to do in certain circumstances, for instance—we interpret an open-ended and large set of practices rather than a smaller and more focused practice.

Bernard Williams gave the names “thick” and “thin” to two families of moral concepts, and he took the difference between them to be fundamental. He called the ideas of moral rightness and wrongness, of what ought and ought not be done, thin concepts, because they are very abstract vehicles of commendation or disparagement that can be attached to an almost unlimited range of actions or states of affairs. We can intelligibly say, of almost any human action, that it is morally required or wrong. Thick moral concepts, on the other hand, mix the praise or disparagement they offer with more concrete factual descriptions. “Brave,” “generous,” “cruel,” and “trustworthy” are thick concepts: each of these praises or condemns a particular kind of behavior that it also describes. So each of the thick concepts can sensibly be applied only to a certain kind of act, an act, we might say, that is a candidate for that particular kind of commendation or condemnation. It is at least intelligible, though preposterous, to say that acts of charity are morally wrong. It is not even intelligible (except, perhaps, in a very special context) to say that charitable acts are cowardly. 

The distinction between thin and thick moral concepts has been misunderstood by some philosophers: its importance has been underestimated by some and exaggerated by others. Some philosophers have insisted on analyzing the distinction away. They say that a thick concept like the concept of cowardice should be understood as a hybrid: it combines a straightforward criterial concept, shared only by those who follow the same criteria for identifying acts of cowardice, with an emotional charge: that such conduct is wrong.㉓ This is a serious mistake. The thick concepts cannot be dissected to reveal a criterial base concept. 

It is not true that we all agree about what conduct is factually described by “cowardice” and disagree only about whether and how much we disapprove of such conduct. Nor can such concepts be dissected by supposing that “cowardly” is a compound of some other descriptive concept (what could this be?) and a negative emotional charge. Whether someone is properly called brave—or tactless or cruel or generous—depends not simply on how he has acted but also on a judgment about the moral valence of his act. Deciding what bravery or tact or cruelty or generosity means—what acts are properly described in these terms—requires interpretation: what one person deems bravery or tact another calls foolhardiness or dishonesty.㉔

Other philosophers take the distinction to mark important divisions within moral theory. Williams, for instance, argued that moral knowledge is possible only of thick concepts, because only these concepts are sufficiently embedded in and given meaning by the practices of particular communities to allow members of those communities to claim knowledge of them.㉕ Many contemporary philosophers call themselves “virtue theorists” because they emphasize the importance of certain thick concepts. They hope in that way to distinguish their general approach from that of the more numerous moral philosophers who offer general theories of thin concepts: Kantians, for example, who defend a formal account of moral duty, and consequentialists absorbed with defining the good that morality requires us always to pursue. In fact, however, the two kinds of concepts are so interrelated and interdependent in their functions that neither can be said to be more fundamental or central or more a matter of knowledge than the other. We could hardly have either without the other. We use thin concepts as conclusions, to report overall moral judgments, but without offering much, if anything, by way of a case to ground those judgments. Thicker concepts often provide the case that the thin concepts presuppose but do not supply. 

The distinction is not polar but one of degree: moral concepts have different degrees of thickness, and each has different degrees in different contexts. In many circumstances, reminding someone of a promise he has made would supply much more by way of a substantive case than accusing him of treachery, but in other circumstances it would supply less. The virtue concepts are among the thickest of moral concepts, but they differ in thickness as well. Saying that someone is generous or tactful is certainly more informative than saying that he is a good or virtuous person, but it is less informative than saying that he is punctilious. The concepts of duty and obligation are commonly treated as thin, but they are thicker than the concept of the good or the impermissible; declaring that someone has a duty or an obligation signals at least a general kind of case for the demand it embodies: it suggests a promise or undertaking or some special responsibility of role or status. The familiar concepts of political morality vary in thickness as well. Describing a tax system as unjust says more than simply declaring it morally objectionable but less than calling it oppressive.

Neither thick nor thin concepts are more central or important to morality than the other kind: they are all part of a single system that would be unrecognizable without both. On some occasions idiom or practice or context makes it more natural to say that an act is just plain wrong than that it is treacherous, inconsiderate, cruel, dishonest, indecent, niggardly, unreasonable, cheap, unworthy, unfair, or contemptuous, or that a person has a good character rather than that he is generous, courageous, noble, or selfless. On other occasions the more concrete charges or claims would seem more natural. In either case, more concrete or more abstract judgments are waiting in the wings, though they may never appear. It is usually pointless to call an act unreasonable or tactless without suggesting that it is for that reason, at least to some degree and in some way, wrong as well. It is usually fraudulent to call something wrong or someone bad without supposing that there is some more informative description that begins at least to say why it is wrong or he is bad. Concrete and abstract concepts all have roles to play, and to exchange, in morality’s repertory.

The flexibility provided by moral concepts of different thickness is useful in a variety of ways. Concepts that differ in thickness allow us to distinguish pro tanto considerations from overall judgments, for example. We might say that though someone did act cruelly on some occasion, it was the right thing for him to do at the time. Or that though what he did was selfish, he had a right to do it, and so no one has a right to complain. (I discussed in Chapter 6 whether the conflict in value these claims might suggest is genuine.) The thinner concepts are particularly appropriate when we want to state moral conclusions about difficult or very evenly balanced cases. We might want to say, for example, that though someone who does not report a friend’s serious crime does the right thing, he would not have been treacherous if he had reported it. Thin concepts are also useful when we want to contrast moral with other kinds of reasons that we might entertain on some occasion. It is not necessary, on those occasions, to specify our moral reasons in any greater detail: “I know this is wrong, but I can’t resist!”㉖ In all these and many other ways, our moral experience is reflected in and facilitated by the distinctions we draw between more and less conclusory and more or less informative moral concepts.

So it is no obstacle to an interpretive understanding of morality and moral reasoning that some of the thinner concepts on which modern moral philosophers have most steadily fixed their attention—the concepts of rightness or goodness—are not so apparently interpretive as thicker concepts are. They do function as interpretive—otherwise we could not disagree using their vocabulary as we plainly do—but the interpretation they require must be focused, at least in the first instance, on other concepts, because the thinner concepts draw conclusions but do not themselves suggest much by way of argument. When argument is needed, we interpret the thicker concepts, including the relatively thinner of those thicker concepts, like the ideas of what is reasonable and what is just, to find grounds for redeeming the less clothed conclusions we offer in the very thin concepts we first use. 

Plato and Aristotle (184)

Because moral concepts are interpretive, both quotidian moral reasoning and high moral philosophy are interpretive exercises. Does that hypothesis help us to better understand the influential moral philosophers of the past? I shall try to answer that question by discussing the arguments of particular philosophers at different stages later in the book. I begin here with what I believe to be classic, obvious, and particularly instructive examples of interpretive moral philosophy.

Plato and Aristotle constructed their moral and political theories around interpretations of virtues and vices, ranging from those we regard as distinctly personal, like wisdom, to the great political virtue of justice. Their arguments were actively holistic. Each offered an elaborate interpretive argument that developed in two significantly different stages. First, they analyzed each of the virtues and vices they took up by constructing conceptions of each that draw upon and reinforce the conceptions they favored of the others. They showed these virtues, that is, as forming a mutually supportive network of moral values. Then, as a second stage, they found interconnections between that network of moral concepts and ethics.㉗ They argued that their conceptions of the moral values were correct because a life that exhibits those values understood through those conceptions is best calculated to provide a state of being, “eudemonia,” that modern translators into English characteristically call “happiness” but that we might better call “a good life”—the life that people, in their own best interests, should try to live.

Terence Irwin has argued that the arguments of Socrates in Plato’s earlier dialogues were not interpretive.㉘ The earlier Socratic method supposed that a successful definition of individual virtues would be reductive: that is, that it would characterize a virtue only descriptively. One of the straight men in an early dialog offers a reductive definition of bravery, for instance: bravery, he says, is holding steadfast in the face of danger.㉙ The earlier Socrates shows that all the attempts at reductive definitions he is offered are inadequate, but he does not offer a reductive definition of his own. On the contrary, he says repeatedly that he is unable to construct one. The Socrates of the Republic, on the other hand, is quite willing to offer conceptions of each of the virtues, but he has abandoned the reductive constraint and adopted the interpretive style. 

He offers conceptions of bravery, temperance, wisdom, and justice that show each of these to be distinct from the others—he rejects the earlier Socratic idea that all the virtues are one because knowledge comprises all the virtues—but to be interdependent nevertheless, so that the definition of each virtue incorporates an appeal to the value of other virtues. Bravery, for example, is not the same as temperance, but bravery cannot be defined independently of temperance. However, the great challenge of the Republic, put in different ways first by Thrasymachus and then by Glaucon and Adeimantus, takes Socrates to the second stage of interpretation I distinguished. He is asked to find connections between justice and happiness—between the moral virtues collected in the former and the ethical ambition of the latter—such that any just person must be happier than any unjust person.

Plato did not form his ideas of justice and of the good life independently and then discover their interdependence. He did not argue that justice, as this was then commonly understood, provides happiness. On the contrary, he denied that what Thrasymachus counted as happiness is genuine happiness. Plato’s conception of justice is strikingly counterintuitive: he analyzes that concept to include a psychic condition of the agent. He seeks an account not of just actions but of a just person, and he identifies a just person, in the first instance, not as someone who cares about others but as someone who cares about the goodness of his own being. True, Plato does labor, as any philosopher using an interpretive approach must, to show that his conception of justice is not too counterintuitive to count as a conception of that virtue. He tries to explain how the enlightened promotion of self gives one an interest in the well-being of others. As we shall see, many other philosophers, including Kant, have followed much the same strategy. Plato’s argument may be unpersuasive—Irwin discusses potent objections to it—but it is plainly directed by an interpretive strategy.

Plato’s interpretive argument is multidimensional; it embraces an account of bravery and temperance as well as justice and happiness. It aims, moreover, at conceptions of the virtues that are not hierarchal but mutually supportive. He does not begin with an account of happiness and mold his discussion of the virtues to fit it. On the contrary, his account of happiness is also initially counterintuitive and can finally be justified only through its interpretive accommodation with the virtues. It is hardly obvious that happiness is the ordering of the soul: that seems to leave out pleasure and the other familiar components of happiness. So Plato must take up the further challenge of showing that his account of happiness is, after all, a good interpretation of what people commonly seek under that name. He must therefore expand the interpretive network still more broadly, to include the account of pleasure that he offers in book 9 of the Republic and then in the Philebus.㉚ This shows pleasure to be not simply a desired experience but an indispensable part, though only part, of a good life. The entire remarkable construction, successful or not, is a paradigm of morality as interpretation. 

Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics is also a superb illustration of the interpretive method. He sets out his account of the virtues by situating each as the mean between two vices: we are to understand what bravery requires by contrasting what is brave both with what is cowardly and what is foolhardy; what temperance means by contrasting temperance with both intemperance, which is too great a concern with nonrational impulses for food, drink, and sex, and insensibility, which is too little concern with them; and so forth. The doctrine of the mean is an interpretive device. Conceptual interpretation often seeks to defend a particular conception of a virtue, as Aristotle also does, by showing how recognizing that virtue, so conceived, helps to promote some other value. The doctrine of the mean works differently: it defends a particular conception of a virtue by constructing a parallel account of that virtue and two recognized vices that might be seen, initially, as bracketing it. 

The representation of the virtue as a mean between the two vices is not an interpretive conclusion but rather a strategy for guiding interpretation: the interpretive challenge is to find an account of the virtue that explains its apparent intermediate position between two vices. We cannot do this by identifying some Goldilocks commodity such that intemperance has too much of it, boorishness too little, and temperance just the right amount. Temperance is a virtue and intemperance a vice, not because the intemperate person takes more pleasure in life than the temperate one, but because he takes pleasure in the wrong things. We can sustain the bracketing strategy, therefore, only by identifying the right things in which to take unlimited pleasure and then the wrong things to take any pleasure (or much pleasure) in having.

Aristotle puts a great many other, neighboring concepts to work in identifying these right and wrong things: the concept of fineness, for example, which some commentators take to be an aesthetic concept, and the ethical concept of bestiality. This bracketing device is only one of his interpretive tools: he triangulates each virtue not only by drawing on some familiar sense of a related vice but also by appealing to other virtues that intersect the virtue under study. So though the brave man does not fear what the coward fears, he properly fears dishonor and disgrace. Even apparently unrelated virtues like civic pride and responsibility figure in the account of bravery: the brave man stands firm, not necessarily in the face of natural threats like the threat of death at sea, but in even hopeless battle when he fights as a citizen for his community. For a citizen, fear of dishonor “is caused by a virtue; for its cause is shame and desire for something fine—for honor—and aversion from reproach, which is disgraceful.”㉛

Aristotle’s discussion of individual virtues corresponds to the first stage of conceptual moral interpretation: it concentrates on moral concepts. His discussion is set against a prior and more general discussion that supplies the second, ethical stage. He starts on a discussion of the virtues only after he has first argued that “eudemonia” consists in activity in accordance with the most complete virtue, in a complete life. Living virtuously is necessary to a good life, he says, even though it is not sufficient, because a virtuous life might be marred by great misfortunes, such as Priam suffered in Troy, or by poverty. No one would call a life cursed by poverty or terrible misfortune a good life, even it was virtuous. But someone might be rich, fortunate, and maximally content with his life—he might, in the common view, be perfectly happy—and yet not have happiness in Aristotle’s conception, because he does not lead a life of virtuous activity.

The connection Aristotle draws between virtues and happiness is interpretive, just as Plato’s is. It is multidimensional and mutually supporting rather than hierarchal. How we understand happiness—a good life—depends on how we understand each of the virtues, which in turn depends on how we understand each of the others. But how we understand the virtues also depends on our independent sense of what happiness is. Aristotle constantly checks his account of the virtues by asking whether common opinion—particularly the opinion of “the wise”—would endorse a life lived in accordance with virtue so understood as a happy or successful life. (See, for example, his account of the role of pleasure in happiness.㉜) This last requirement is yet another turn of the interpretive screw, if we assume that the wise are particularly good judges of virtue because they are themselves virtuous. It would be a serious misunderstanding to condemn Aristotle’s argument as circular, not because it is not in its broad sweep circular, but because that is its achievement, not its failure.㉝

We should notice, finally, a further dimension of interpretation that Aristotle treats as particularly important. He declares that the project of better understanding happiness, and therefore virtue, is not an abstract, theoretical enquiry but one aimed at action, and principally political action. The Nicomachean Ethics, he says, is an exercise in political science. We need to understand happiness so that we can construct a good state, which is a state in which people are enabled and encouraged to lead good lives. Once again this is not a one-way connection. We understand good government better by better understanding happiness and the virtues, which good government fosters. But we also better understand the virtues, and therefore happiness, by thinking in the other direction as well: by asking which personal qualities make for good citizenship in the kind of state we assume to be good. Politics adds a third stage to Aristotle’s interpretive analysis. It will, eventually, for us as well.

===============================================================================
p.453

➀ For an argument that we should not so agree, see Timothy Williamson, Vagueness (New York: Routledge, 1994).

➁ Saul Kripke, Naming and Necessity (Oxford: Blackwell, 1972); Hilary Putnam, “The Meaning of ‘Meaning,’ ” Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 7 (1975): 131–93.

➂ See my Justice in Robes (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2006), 218–19, 223–27.

➃ I mean not to exclude other types of concepts: perhaps we should recognize mathematical kinds, for instance. I discuss, as interpretive concepts, those amenable to interpretation on the value theory defended in Chapter 7.

➄ I understand Crispin Wright to suppose that a discourse is not assertoric at all without shared paradigms. See Wright, Truth and Objectivity (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1992), 48.

➅ Some readers may think it better to treat all concepts, including those I designate as criterial or natural-kind concepts, as interpretive. I do not agree, but my arguments do not depend on rejecting that view. They depend only on accepting that the ethical, moral, and political concepts I later discuss are interpretive.

➆ This is not simply a matter of something important turning on the issue. If you and I bet a huge sum on whether the next person through the theater door would be bald, we would have to call off the bet, not engage in some complex interpretation, if the next person was a very close case.

➇ Thomas Nagel, “The Psychophysical Nexus,” in Paul Boghossian and Christopher Peacocke, eds., New Essays on the A Priori (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000).

➈ See “Pluto Not a Planet, Astronomers Rule,” August 2006, news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2006/08/060824-pluto-planet.html. But see “Pluto IS a Planet!” www.plutoisaplanet.org: “Welcome to the main web page for the Society for the Preservation of Pluto as a Planet! We here at SP3 believe strongly that Pluto’s status as a planet should not be in question … Please join us on our mission to keep Pluto a planet and find out what you can do to support our noble cause.”

➉ John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1971), 5.

⑪ This is not a further difficulty for the status skeptics I discussed in Chapter 3 who insist that we must treat claims about the good or what ought to be done as disguised commands or recommendations or projections of an attitude or emotion. If we accepted their advice we could say, not that general moral concepts are criterial, but that moral disagreement is genuine because it reflects difference in recommendation or attitude or emotion. But we cannot take this suggestion seriously as an interpretation of actual moral experience. We all know the difference between commanding someone to shut the door and declaring that he has a moral duty to shut the door. Treating moral claims as commands or recommendations or projections is not an interpretive conclusion. It is a heroic attempt to rescue moral experience from external skepticism by reinventing it as something else. In Part One we found external skepticism impossible even coherently to formulate; we have no need of rescue.

⑫ There are difficulties in this account: perhaps some other large mammal looks sufficiently like a lion that many people have called it a lion. But the idea of a natural-kind concept supposes that once people are made aware that there are fundamental biological differences between the animal to which the word has been attached and the different animal they have also been calling a lion, they correct their mistake. If that were not true—if they insisted that the different animal was also a lion—a different hypothesis would be called for. We might then decide that the concept of a lion in actual use is not a natural-kind concept after all but a criterial one: it describes what has a certain kind of appearance. Or that there are two concepts rather than one in play and that these are often confused, producing cases of spurious agreement or disagreement.

⑬ Donald Davidson, “The Structure and Content of Truth” (The Dewey Lectures, 1989), Journal of Philosophy 87 (1990): 279–328; Davidson, Truth and Predication (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2005).

⑭ Wright, Truth and Objectivity.

⑮ It has also been called by other names, and the name as well as the theory is controversial. There is an excellent discussion of different versions of the theory and objections to it under the title “The Deflationary Theory of Truth” in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, plato.stanford.edu.

⑯ Bernard Williams, Truth and Truthfulness: An Essay in Genealogy (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2004).

⑰ It might be useful to point out, in view of Benjamin Zipursky’s reading, that though I relied on the platitude of repetition in my discussion of external status skepticism in Part One, I did not commit myself to the deflationary theory, which holds that the repetition exhausts truth, or to any other philosophical theory of truth. See Benjamin C. Zipursky, “Two Takes on Truth in Normative Discourse,” in Symposium: Justice for Hedgehogs: A Conference on Ronald Dworkin’s Forthcoming Book (special issue), Boston University Law Review 90, no. 2 (April 2010): 525. I argued that skeptical claims cannot be construed as other than moral claims themselves. Nor do I intend to accept, as he fears I do, a correspondence theory of truth for science. I mention it as a candidate for that role, as I say, only to have an example to contrast with interpretation.

⑱ This suggestion is in certain respects like those of Crispin Wright (see his Truth and Objectivity). He describes a “minimalist” concept of truth defined by what he calls “platitudes” that can be deployed in a variety of domains. Some of these domains, he says, provide more “realism” than others. For instance, a domain is more “realist” if its propositions have “wide cosmological role,” that is, if they can figure in the explanation of a wide variety of propositions in other domains. He sets out what he calls “the makings of a prima facie case” that morality fails that test and then adds that if so that is “bad” though not “catastrophic” news for moral realism (198). He offers a further “cognitive command” standard: a domain is more realist in which it is a priori that a failure of convergence in opinion reflects an independent cognitive failure of some kind. Morality fails that test as well: we may well disagree about the justice of a foreign policy with people who rely on the same information we have and are subject to no more distorting influences than we are. The abstract concept I contemplate in the text, on the contrary, is not platitudinous or minimalist: it requires a substantive conception of inquiry that allows us to understand claims of truth in different domains as claims of unique success. Nor, in my view, are some of the domains that allow unique success more “realist” than others: they are all real. It is not “bad news” that morality fails the wide cosmological and cognitive control tests. The injustice of a foreign policy is not less real because the injustice explains no physical or mental phenomena or because those who disagree suffer from no independent cognitive defect. Many philosophers believe that we could have no warrant for claiming exclusive truth in such circumstances and that any account of truth that did not deny our warrant would be vacuous or too lenient. But—though by now I risk irritation in the repetition—that is itself a moral opinion that must be supported not by Archimedean epistemology but by some argument that shows the moral importance of cognitive command.

⑲ I am grateful to David Wiggins for pointing this out to me. For Wiggins’s illuminating study of Peirce’s theories, see his “Reflections on Inquiry and Truth,” in Cheryl Misak, ed., The Cambridge Companion to Peirce (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004).

⑳ Peirce, “The Fixation of Belief” (1877), in Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, vol. 5, ed. Charles Hartshorne, Paul Weiss, and Arthur Burks (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1931–1958), 375.

㉑ That may not be an irresistible conclusion. We might consider a more complex interpretive account that took only risible examples as paradigms but yet claimed some analysis of these paradigms that permitted events unlikely to provoke laughter nevertheless to be funny. It seems dubious, however, that any such interpretation would be persuasive.

㉒ Kit Fine pointed out to me the connection between interpretive concepts and the paradox of analysis.

㉓ R. M. Hare, The Language of Morals (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1952), 121; Hare, Freedom and Reason (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1963), 21–29.

㉔ See John McDowell’s discussion of this subject, “Reason, Value and Reality,” in Mind, Value, and Reality (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1998).

㉕ Bernard Williams, Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy (London: Fontana, 1985).

㉖ T. M. Scanlon, “Wrongness and Reasons: A Reexamination,” in Oxford Studies in Metaethics, vol. 2, ed. Russ Shafer-Landau (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).

㉗ I do not suggest that either Plato or Aristotle accepted the distinction between moral and ethical values I have used in this book.

㉘ Terence Irwin, Plato’s Ethics (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995).

㉙ Plato, Laches, in Plato: Laches. Protagoras. Meno. Euthydemus, trans. W. R. M. Lamb (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1924).

㉚ Plato: Statesman. Philebus. Ion, trans. Harold North Fowler and W. R. M. Lamb (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1925).

㉛ Irwin, Plato’s Ethics, 75.

㉜ Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, trans. Roger Crisp (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), VII.11–14 and X.1–5.

㉝ The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, in the entry for Aristotle’s Ethics, notes, “A common complaint about Aristotle’s attempt to defend his conception of happiness is that his argument is too general to show that it is in one’s interest to possess any of the particular virtues as they are traditionally conceived. Suppose we grant, at least for the sake of argument, that doing anything well, including living well, consists in exercising certain skills; and let us call these skills, whatever they turn out to be, virtues. Even so, that point does not by itself allow us to infer that such qualities as temperance, justice, courage, as they are normally understood, are virtues. They should be counted as virtues only if it can be shown that actualizing precisely these skills is what happiness consists in. What Aristotle owes us, then, is an account of these traditional qualities that explains why they must play a central role in any well-lived life.” The author of the essay suggests, in response, that Aristotle meant to address only those already educated to a love of the virtues. I believe that treating Aristotle’s account as interpretive, weaving together conceptions of particular virtues with an overall conception of happiness, provides a more satisfying answer.

===============================================================================

Key concepts:

concepts, types of (158)
-intrepretive: paradigms
-criterial: decision procedure
-natural-kind: decision procedure

deflationary (173)

moral reasoning: conceptual interpretation (157)

paradox of analysis (180)

truth: unique success in inquiry
  truth as the intrinsic goal of inquiry (177)