9 Dignity (191)

Is Morality Closed?

Plato and Aristotle treated morality as a genre of interpretation. They tried to show the true character of each of the main moral and political virtues by relating each to the others, and then to the broad ethical ideals their translators summarize as happiness. As I said in Chapter 1, but remind you now, I use the terms “ethical” and “moral” in what might seem a special way. Moral standards prescribe how we ought to treat others; ethical standards, how we ought to live ourselves. We can—many people do—use either “ethical” and “moral” or both in a broader sense that erases this distinction, so that morality includes what I call ethics, and vice versa. But we would then have to recognize the distinction I draw in some other vocabulary in order to ask whether our desire to lead good lives for ourselves provides a justifying reason for our concern with what we owe to others. Any of these vocabularies would allow us to pursue the interesting idea that moral principles should be interpreted so that being moral makes us happy in the sense Plato and Aristotle meant.

In this chapter we begin that interpretive project. We aim to find some ethical standard—some conception of what it is to live well—that will guide us in our interpretation of moral concepts. But there is an apparent obstacle. This strategy seems to suppose that we should understand our moral responsibilities in whatever way is best for us, but that goal seems contrary to the spirit of morality, because morality should not depend on any benefit being moral might bring. We might try to meet this objection through a familiar philosophical distinction: we might distinguish between the content of moral principles, which must be categorical, and the justification of those principles, which might consistently appeal to the long-term interests of agents bound by those principles.

We might argue, for example, that it is in everyone’s long-term interests to accept a principle that forbids lying even in circumstances when lying would be in the liar’s immediate interests. Everyone benefits when people accept a self-denying rule of that kind rather than each lying when that is in his immediate interest. However, this maneuver seems unsatisfactory, because we do not believe that our reasons for being moral depend on even our long-term interests. We are drawn to the more austere view that the justification and definition of moral principle should both be independent of our interests, even in the long term. Virtue should be its own reward; we need assume no other benefit in doing our duty.

But that austere view would set a severe limit to how far we could press an interpretive account of morality: it would permit the first stage I distinguished in Plato’s and Aristotle’s arguments, but not the second. We could seek integration within our distinctly moral convictions. We could list the concrete moral duties, responsibilities, and virtues we recognize and then try to bring these convictions into interpretive order—into a mutually reinforcing network of ideas. Perhaps we could find very general moral principles, like the utilitarian principle, that justify and are in turn justified by these concrete requirements and ideals. Or we could proceed in the other direction: setting out very general moral principles that we find appealing, and then seeing whether we can match these with the concrete convictions we find we can approve. But we could not set the entire interpretive construction into any larger web of value; we could not justify or test our moral convictions by asking how well these serve other, different purposes or ambitions people might or should have.

That would be disappointing, because we need to find authenticity as well as integrity in our morality, and authenticity requires that we break out of distinctly moral considerations to ask what form of moral integrity fits best with how we want to conceive our personality and our life. The austere view blocks that question. Of course it is unlikely, as we recognized in Chapter 6, that we will ever achieve a full integration of our moral, political, and ethical values that feels authentic and right. That is why responsibility is a continuing project and never a completed task. But the wider the network we can explore, the further we can push that project.

The austere view is disappointing in another way. Philosophers ask why people should be moral. If we accept the austere view, then we can only answer: because morality requires this. That is not an obviously illegitimate answer. The web of justification is always finally, at its limits, circular, and it is not viciously circular to say that morality provides its own only justification, that we must be moral simply because that is what morality demands. But it is nevertheless sad to be forced to say this. Philosophers have pressed the question why be moral because it seems odd to think that morality, which is often burdensome, has the force it does in our lives just because it is there, like an arduous and unpleasant mountain we must constantly cross but that we might hope wasn’t there or would somehow crumble. We want to think that morality connects with human purposes and ambitions in some less negative way, that it is not all constraint and no value.

I therefore propose a different understanding of the irresistible thought that morality is categorical. We cannot justify a moral principle just by showing that following that principle would promote someone’s or everyone’s desires in either the short or the long term. The fact of desire—even enlightened desire, even a universal desire supposedly embedded in human nature—cannot justify a moral duty. So understood, our sense that morality need not serve our interests is only another application of Hume’s principle. It does not rule out tying ethics and morality together in the way Plato and Aristotle did, and in the way our own project proposes, because that project takes ethics to be, not a matter of psychological fact about what people happen to or even inevitably want or take to be in their own interest, but itself a matter of ideal.

We need a statement of what we should take our personal goals to be that fits with and justifies our sense of what obligations, duties, and responsibilities we have to others. This characterization seems to fit Kant’s moral program, or so I will suggest later. His conception of metaphysical freedom is most illuminating when it is understood as an ethical ideal that plays a dominant justifying role in his moral theory. Our own interpretive project is less foundational because more evidently holistic. We look for a conception of living well that can guide our interpretation of moral concepts. But we want, as part of the same project, a conception of morality that can guide our interpretation of living well.

True, people confronted with other people’s suffering do not normally ask whether helping those people will create a more ideal life for themselves. They may be moved by the suffering itself or by some sense of duty. Philosophers debate whether this makes a difference.➀ Should people help a child because the child needs help or because it is their duty to help? In fact both motives might well be in play, along with hosts of others that a sophisticated psychological analysis might reveal, and it might be difficult or impossible to say which dominates on any particular occasion. Nothing important, I believe, turns on the answer: doing what you take to be your duty because it is your duty is hardly disreputable. Nor is it culpably self-regarding to worry about the impact of behaving badly on the character of one’s life; it is not narcissistic to think, as people often say, “I couldn’t live with myself if I did that.” In any case, however, these questions of psychology and character are not relevant now. Our question is the different one whether, when we try to fix, criticize, and ground our moral responsibilities, we can sensibly assume that our ideas about what morality requires and about the best human ambitions should reinforce one another.

Hobbes and Hume can each be read as claiming not just a psychological but an ethical basis for familiar moral principles. Hobbes’s putative ethics is unsatisfactory. At least for most of us, survival is not a sufficient condition of living well. Hume’s sensibilities, translated into an ethics, are much more agreeable, but experience teaches us that even people who are sensitive to the needs of others cannot resolve moral—or ethical—issues simply by asking themselves what they are naturally inclined to feel or do. Nor does it help much to expand Hume’s ethics into a general utilitarian principle. The idea that each of us should treat his own interests as no more important than those of anyone else has seemed an attractive basis for morality to many philosophers.➁ But, as I shall shortly argue, it can hardly serve as a strategy for living well oneself.

Religion can provide a justifying ethics for people who are religious in the right way; we have ample illustration of this in the familiar moralizing interpretations of sacred texts. Such people understand living well to mean respecting or pleasing a god, and they can interpret their moral responsibilities by asking which view of those responsibilities would best respect or most please that god. But that structure of thought could be helpful, as a guide to integrating ethics and morality, only for people who treat some sacred text as an explicit and detailed moral rule book. People who think only that their god has commanded love for and charity to others, as I believe many religious people do, cannot find, just in that command, any answers to what morality requires. In any case, I shall not rely on the idea of any divine book of detailed moral instruction here.

The Good Life and Living Well (195)

If we reject Hobbesean and Humean views of ethics and are not tempted by religious ones, yet still propose to unite morality and ethics, we must find some other account of what living well means. As I said, it cannot mean simply having whatever one in fact wants: having a good life is a matter of our critical interests, the interests we should have.➂ It is therefore a matter of judgment and controversy what a good life is.➃ But is it plausible to suppose that being moral is the best way to make one’s own life a good one? It is wildly implausible if we hold to popular conceptions of what morality requires and what makes a life good. Morality may require someone to pass up a job in cigarette advertising that would rescue him from great poverty. He would lead a better life in most people’s view if he took the job and prospered.

Of course an interpretive account would not be limited by these conventional understandings. We might be able to construct a conception of a good life such that an immoral or base act would always, or almost always, makes the agent’s life finally a worse life to lead. But I now suspect that any such attempt would fail.➄ Any attractive conception of our moral responsibilities would sometimes demand great sacrifices—it might require us to risk, or perhaps even to sacrifice, our lives. It is hard to believe that someone who has suffered terrible misfortunes has had a better life than he would have had if he had acted immorally and then prospered in every way, creatively, emotionally, and materially, in a long and peaceful life.

We can, however, pursue a somewhat different, and I believe more promising, idea. This requires a distinction within ethics that is familiar in morals: a distinction between duty and consequence, between the right and the good. We should distinguish between living well and having a good life. These two different achievements are connected and distinguished in this way: living well means striving to create a good life, but only subject to certain constraints essential to human dignity. These two concepts, of living well and of having a good life, are interpretive concepts. Our ethical responsibility includes trying to find appropriate conceptions of both of them.

Each of these fundamental ethical ideals needs the other. We cannot explain the importance of a good life except by noticing how creating a good life contributes to living well. We are self-conscious animals who have drives, instincts, tastes, and preferences. There is no mystery why we should want to satisfy those drives and serve those tastes. But it can seem mysterious why we should want a life that is good in a more critical sense: a life we can take pride in having lived when the drives are slaked or even if they are not. We can explain this ambition only when we recognize that we have a responsibility to live well and believe that living well means creating a life that is not simply pleasurable but good in that critical way.

You might ask: responsibility to whom? It is misleading to answer: responsibility to ourselves. People to whom responsibilities are owed can normally release those who are responsible, but we cannot release ourselves from our responsibility to live well. We must instead acknowledge an idea that I believe we almost all accept in the way we live but that is rarely explicitly formulated or acknowledged. We are charged to live well by the bare fact of our existence as self-conscious creatures with lives to lead. We are charged in the way we are charged by the value of anything entrusted to our care. It is important that we live well; not important just to us or to anyone else, but just important. (I return to the idea of objective importance later in this chapter.)

We have a responsibility to live well, and the importance of living well accounts for the value of having a critically good life. These are no doubt controversial ethical judgments. I also make controversial ethical judgments in any view I take about which lives are good or well-lived. In my own view, someone who leads a boring, conventional life without close friendships or challenges or achievements, marking time to his grave, has not had a good life, even if he thinks he has and even if he has thoroughly enjoyed the life he has had. If you agree, we cannot explain why he should regret this simply by calling attention to pleasures missed: there may have been no pleasures missed, and in any case there is nothing to miss now. We must suppose that he has failed at something: failed in his responsibilities for living.

What kind of value can living well have? The analogy between art and life has often been drawn and as often ridiculed. We should live our lives, the Romantics said, as a work of art. We distrust the analogy now because it sounds too Wilde, as if the qualities we value in a painting—fine sensibility or a complex formal organization or a subtle interpretation of art’s own history—were the values we should seek in life: the values of the aesthete. These may be poor values to seek in the way we live. But to condemn the analogy for that reason misses its point, which lies in the relation between the value of what is created and the value of the acts of creating it. We value great art most fundamentally not because the art as product enhances our lives but because it embodies a performance, a rising to artistic challenge. We value human lives well lived not for the completed narrative, as if fiction would do as well, but because they too embody a performance: a rising to the challenge of having a life to lead. The final value of our lives is adverbial, not adjectival. It is the value of the performance, not anything that is left when the performance is subtracted. It is the value of a brilliant dance or dive when the memories have faded and the ripples died away.

We need another distinction. Something’s product value is the value it has just as an object, independently of the process through which it was created or of any other feature of its history. A painting may have product value, and this may be subjective or objective. Its formal arrangement may be beautiful, which gives it objective value, and it may give pleasure to viewers and be prized by collectors, which properties give it subjective value. A perfect mechanical replica of that painting has the same beauty. Whether it has the same subjective value depends largely on whether it is known to be a replica: it has as great subjective value as the original for those who think that it is the original. The original has a kind of objective value that the replica cannot have, however: it has the value of having been manufactured through a creative act that has performance value. It was created by an artist intending to create art. The object—the work of art—is wonderful because it is the upshot of a wonderful performance; it would not be wonderful if it were a mechanical replica or if it had been created by some freakish accident.

It was once popular to laugh at abstract art by supposing that it could have been painted by a chimpanzee, and people once speculated whether one of billions of apes typing randomly might produce King Lear. If a chimpanzee by accident painted Blue Poles or typed the words of King Lear in the right order, these products would no doubt have very great subjective value. Many people would be desperate to own or anxious to see them. But they would have no performance value at all. Performance value may exist independently of any object with which that performance value has been fused. There is no product value left when a great painting has been destroyed, but the fact of its creation remains and retains its full performance value. Ucello’s achievements are no less valuable because his paintings were gravely damaged in the Florence flood; Leonardo’s Last Supper might have perished, but the wonder of its creation would not have been diminished. A musical performance or a ballet may have enormous objective value, but if it has not been recorded or filmed, its product value immediately evaporates. Some performances—improvisational theater and jazz concerts—find value in their ephemeral singularity: they will never be repeated.

We may count a life’s positive impact—the way the world itself is better because that life was lived—as its product value. Aristotle thought that a good life is one spent in contemplation, exercising reason, and acquiring knowledge; Plato that it is a harmonious life achieved through order and balance. Neither of these ancient ideas requires that a wonderful life have any impact at all. Most people’s opinions, so far as these are self-conscious and articulate, ignore impact in the same way. Many of them think that a life devoted to the love of a god or gods is the finest life to lead, and a great many, including many who do not share that opinion, think the same of a life lived in inherited traditions and steeped in the satisfactions of conviviality, friendship, and family. All these lives have, for most people who want them, subjective value: they bring satisfaction. But so far as we think them objectively good—so far as it would make sense to want to find satisfaction in such lives—it is the performance rather than the product value of living that way that counts.➅

Philosophers used to speculate about what they called the meaning of life. (That is now the job of mystics and comedians.) It is difficult to find enough product value in most people’s lives to suppose that they have meaning through their impact. Yes, but for some lives, penicillin would not have been discovered so soon and King Lear would never have been written. But if we measure a life’s value by its consequence, all but a few lives would have no value, and the great value of some other lives—of a carpenter who pounded nails into a play house on the Thames—would be only accidental. On any plausible view of what is truly wonderful in almost any human life, impact hardly comes into the story at all.

If we want to make sense of a life having meaning, we must take up the Romantic’s analogy. We find it natural to say that an artist gives meaning to his raw materials and that a pianist gives fresh meaning to what he plays. We can think of living well as giving meaning—ethical meaning, if we want a name—to a life. That is the only kind of meaning in life that can stand up to the fact and fear of death. Does all that strike you as silly? Just sentimental? When you do something smaller well—play a tune or a part or a hand, throw a curve or a compliment, make a chair or a sonnet or love—your satisfaction is complete in itself. Those are achievements within life. Why can’t a life also be an achievement complete in itself, with its own value in the art in living it displays?

One qualification. I said that living well includes striving for a good life, but that is not necessarily a matter of minimizing the chances of a bad one. In fact many traits of character we value are not best calculated to produce what we independently judge to be the best available life. We value spontaneity, style, authenticity, and daring: setting oneself difficult or even impossible projects. We might be tempted to collapse the two ideas by saying that developing and exercising these traits and virtues are part of what makes a life good. But that seems too reductive. If we know that someone now in poverty courted that poverty by choosing an ambitious but risky career, we may well think that he was right to run that risk. He may have done a better job of living by striving for an unlikely but magnificent success. An artist who could be comfortably admired and prosperous—Seurat, if a name helps—strikes out in an entirely new direction that will isolate and impoverish him, require immersion in his work to the cost of his marriage and friendships, and may well not succeed even artistically. If it does succeed, moreover, the success is unlikely to be recognized, as in Seurat’s case, until after his death. We may want to say: if he pulls it off, he will have had a better life, even taking account of the terrible costs, than if he had not tried, because even an unrecognized great achievement makes a life a good one.

But suppose it doesn’t come off; what he produces, though novel, is of less merit than the more conventional work he would otherwise have painted. We might think, if we value daring very highly as a virtue, that even in retrospect he made the right choice. It didn’t work out, and his life was worse than if he had never tried. But he was right, all things ethically considered, to try. This is, I agree, an outré example: starving geniuses make good philosophical copy, but they are not thick on the ground. We can replicate the example in a hundred more commonplace ways, however—entrepreneurs pursuing risky but dramatic inventions, for instance, or skiers pressing the envelope of danger. But whether we are ourselves drawn to think that living well sometimes means choosing what is likely to be a worse life, we must recognize the possibility that it does. Living well is not the same as maximizing the chance of producing the best possible life. The complexity of ethics matches the complexity of morality.

Being Bad and Moral Luck (200)

Our ethical responsibilities are as categorical as our moral responsibilities. That is why we not only regret not having lived well but blame ourselves. The despair of Sydney Carton or Ivan Illyitch was not self-pity for bad luck but self-excoriation for weakness and indolence, in Carton’s case, and fatal ethical misjudgment in Illyitch’s. We are not simply passive vessels in which a good life may or may not occur.

But having a bad life does not always mean not having lived well: that discrimination is one of the most important consequences of distinguishing the two ideals. Someone may have a bad life in spite of living well, as we have already noticed, because he dared greatly and failed. More generally, he may live well and have a bad life because the goodness of his life does not depend entirely on his own decisions and efforts: it depends critically on his circumstances and luck as well. If he has been born in great poverty or to a despised race, or is severely crippled, or dies very young, his life has been disadvantaged in ways he could not have changed. And the distinction may cut the other way: someone may have a very good life and not live well at all. We read of a Medici prince who lived what strikes us as a particularly wonderful life of achievement, refinement, cultivation, and pleasure. Then we learn more: he made this life possible by a career of killing and betrayal on a very grand scale. If we were to insist that living well is just having a good life, we would then have to say either that he lived well after all, which seems monstrous, or that, on a second look, his life was not a good one because his immorality made it much worse than it would otherwise have been.

That latter choice would revive the implausible view we rejected a moment ago, that immorality always and necessarily makes a life overall worse. In fact, on any plausible standard of what makes a life good, our prince had a better life than he would have had if he had scrupulously respected his moral responsibilities. But it does not follow that he lived well. He failed his ethical responsibilities; he should not have committed the crimes he did, and he should have settled for the less spectacular life he would then have had. So even though we may think that he made his life a better one by his immoral acts, we should still say that he did a worse job of living.

The distinction between the two ideals helps to explain a further phenomenon that has intrigued philosophers.➆ We inevitably carry a sharp burden of regret for serious harm we did that was in no way our fault. Oedipus blinded himself because he killed his own father, unaware of his patricide. A school bus driver who crashed his bus, killing a dozen children, carries a special sorrow for the rest of his life, even if his driving was faultless and the accident no one’s fault. His is not just an impersonal sorrow for the event—the sorrow anyone reading a newspaper might feel—but special sorrow because it was he who was driving the bus. Some philosophers have called this not merely bad luck but bad moral luck: the driver not only is likely to feel a special deep regret but would be defective in moral sensibility if he did not.

This is puzzling for those who believe that guilt should track only fault, that nothing is morally bad, to paraphrase Kant, except a bad will. We can resolve the puzzle and yet recognize the force of “moral luck” through our distinction. Whether I have lived well is not affected by harm I did without fault, but it nevertheless makes perfect sense—it is in fact irresistible—to suppose that how good my life has been is very much affected. Just as I can regret that my life was spoiled by the injustice of others for which I was blameless, so I can equally regret that my life was spoiled by the fact that but for my blameless acts a tragedy would not have happened. Guilt tracks fault when we ask whether we have lived well or badly, but regret tracks luck when we ask how good our life has been.

The distinction between a good life and living well is also helpful in confronting another ancient question. Can what happens after your death affect the quality of your life? It was bad for Priam when Achilles dragged Hector’s body three times around the walls of Troy. But was it bad for Hector? Is it good for you if your children are happy after your death? Bad for you if your books are all destroyed? We cannot understand people’s intense concern with their posthumous fate without recognizing that it does matter to them what happens then.➇ Yet that can seem silly: why should they care? Our distinction helps. Whether people have lived well is not affected by what happens after they have ceased to live; nothing can affect that, any more than whether a painter has painted well depends on how his painting fares in the market. But whether someone has had a good life can be influenced after his death by anything that adds to or takes away from its achievements or hopes. How good a life you have had waxes and wanes after you are no more.

I said earlier that the two ideas—living well and having a good life—need each other. But our Medici prince teaches us that the ideals may whisper opposite advice. Which is then the more fundamental ethical responsibility? Living well. It is ethically irresponsible for you to live less well in order to make your life a better one, and inappropriate for you to take pleasure or pride in your life’s goodness when you achieved this at the cost of living badly. We might say (using a term developed by economists that John Rawls made popular among philosophers) that the value of living well is lexically prior to the value of a good life.➈ But the goodness of a life nevertheless has independent value. You should feel glad when your life is good, but not if you cheated to achieve it. You should regret a life that is less good because your luck has been bad or because others have cheated you.

Two Ethical Principles (202)

The distinction between living well and having a good life, remember, is in service of a hypothesis. We cannot integrate ethics and morality in an overall interpretive web by supposing that being moral is essential to a good life. But we can entertain the hypothesis, at least, that morality is essential to living well. It will not help much, however, to establish that proposition in only one direction: that people do not live well unless they respect their moral duties. That is an appealing proposition, but it cannot help us decide what those duties are. It makes ethical responsibility depend on moral responsibility, but not the other way around; only a bilateral interpretive connection can do that. If the connection is to serve any useful purpose in our interpretive project, it must be a matter of integration, not simply incorporation.

I must explain the difference. There are two views we might take about the substantive connection between being good and living well. We might think that living well requires being moral, so that our prince did not live as well as he might have done, but that the content of morality is nevertheless fixed by reflecting only on morality itself and is in no way determined by any other aspects or dimensions of living well. We might think, that is, that living well simply incorporates morality without that connection in any way affecting what morality requires. Or we might treat the content of morality as fixed at least in part by the independent character of ethical responsibility: we might suppose that just as our ethical responsibilities are partly fixed by our moral responsibilities to others, so the latter are fixed in part by what our ethical responsibilities are. On this second view, morality and ethics are integrated in the interpretive way we have been exploring over the last few chapters.

Most religions take the first view of the central values of their faith. They insist that living well requires devotion to one or more gods, but they deny that the nature of these gods, or their standing as gods, in any way derives from the fact that living well includes respecting them, or that we can advance our understanding of their nature by asking how, more precisely, they would have to be in order to make respecting them part of living well. The gods, they insist, are who or what they are, and it falls to us, in our responsibility for our own lives, to try to discover this so far as we can and to act in the light of what we discover. That is also the view we take of scientific fact. In science, I said, we draw a sharp distinction between the intrinsic goal of seeking the truth and our justifying reasons for seeking that truth.➉ We think that trying to understand the structure of the universe is part of living well, but we do not think—unless we are crude pragmatists or mad—that we identify that structure by asking what view of it would help us to live well.

Many people take the same view about the value of art. We are responsible for discovering what is wonderful in art and respecting its wonder, they say, but we must take care not to commit the fallacy of supposing that something is beautiful because it makes our life better to appreciate it, or that we can identify and analyze its beauty by considering what it would do us good to admire in that way. On that view, living well incorporates art but is not integrated with it. That is a controversial view. I described my own, not wholly different, view in Chapter 7: that the meaning and value of a work of art do depend on the proper reasons for evaluating and interpreting it. I believe that art, like morality, connects with the ethical hub.

If moral values are best understood as integrated with, rather than simply incorporated in, ethical responsibility, we might hope to capitalize on the connection in a more powerful exploration of moral conviction. We can achieve that integration, however, only if we can find some compelling aspect or dimension of living well that is not itself, at least at first glance, a matter of our duties to others but yet both affects and is affected by those duties. I believe that we can find that interpretive lever in the twin, connected ideas of self-respect and authenticity.

I now introduce two principles that I believe state fundamental requirements of living well. In other work I have discussed related though different principles as political principles; I stated these political principles in Chapter 1 and I will employ them in later chapters.⑪ I describe these now, however, only as ethical principles. The first is a principle of self-respect. Each person must take his own life seriously: he must accept that it is a matter of importance that his life be a successful performance rather than a wasted opportunity. The second is a principle of authenticity. Each person has a special, personal responsibility for identifying what counts as success in his own life; he has a personal responsibility to create that life through a coherent narrative or style that he himself endorses.

Together the two principles offer a conception of human dignity: dignity requires self-respect and authenticity. The distinction between the two principles may seem artificial; each could easily be called by the other’s name. You cannot think it important that you choose values around which to live your life unless you think it important that your life have value. Otherwise why should it be through values that you seek to identify yourself? And you cannot think you have created something of value in living your life unless you find what you have created valuable. You may think that subscribing obediently to the traditions of some culture or faith is, at least for you, the right path to success in living. But that must be what you think, not because others require you to live that way. Nevertheless I shall discuss the two principles separately because they raise different philosophical issues.

One preliminary word about the overall title I offer for the two principles together. The idea of dignity has been stained by overuse and misuse. It appears regularly in human rights conventions and political constitutions and, with even less discrimination, in political manifestos. It is used almost thoughtlessly either to provide a pseudo-argument or just to provide an emotional charge: campaigners against prenatal genetic surgery declare it an insult to human dignity for doctors to repair disease or deficiency in a fetus.⑫ Still, it would be a shame to surrender an important idea or even a familiar name to this corruption. We should rather take up the job of identifying a reasonably clear and attractive conception of dignity; I try to do this through the two principles just described. Others will disagree: dignity, like so many of the concepts that figure in my long argument, is an interpretive concept.

Later chapters of this book use the idea of dignity to help identify the content of morality: acts are wrong if they insult the dignity of others. Other philosophers—notably Thomas Scanlon—believe we should argue in the other direction: an act is an insult to dignity when and because it is morally wrong in some other way.⑬ I am unsure how great this difference turns out to be once some conception of dignity is specified. Scanlon, for instance, believes that an act is wrong if condemned by a principle no one could reasonably reject. If it is always and automatically a reason for someone to reject a principle that it does not treat his life as intrinsically important, or that it denies his freedom to choose values for himself, then the two approaches come together. I use dignity as an organizing idea because it facilitates our interpretive project to collect widely shared ethical principles under one portmanteau description.

Self-Respect (205)

The two principles I described might seem obvious stated so abstractly. But it is far from clear what actual force they have as ethical imperatives, that is, as concrete conditions of living well. I begin with self-respect. That principle insists that I must recognize the objective importance of my living well. I must accept, that is, that it would be a mistake for me not to care how I lived. I do not mean simply to repeat the orthodox claim that each person’s life has intrinsic and equal worth. It is not clear what that orthodox claim means. If we understand it as a claim about the product value of human beings, we must reject it. The world does not go better when there are more people in it, as we might well think it does go better when there are more great paintings painted. If we understand the orthodox claim to insist that each life has the same performance value, then it is false as well. Many lives have little performance value, and the performance value of all lives is certainly not equal.

In practice, the equal-worth principle is usually understood not as an ethical principle but as a moral principle about how people must be treated. It insists that all human lives are inviolable and that no one should be treated as if his life were less important than anyone else’s. Some philosophers cite the equal value of human lives to support more positive claims: that the people of rich nations should make sacrifices in order to help the miserable poor of other nations, for example. Our project hopes to connect the principles of dignity we are now exploring with those and other moral principles, but that is a matter for later chapters. Our principle of self-respect is different: it is not in itself a moral claim. It describes an attitude that people should have toward their own lives: they should think it important that they live well. The principle of self-respect requires each of us to treat his own life as having that kind of importance.

Stephen Darwall has made a useful distinction between recognition respect and appraisal respect.⑭ The latter is the respect we show someone in virtue of his character or achievements; the former includes the respect we must show people just out of recognition of their status as people. The self-respect that dignity demands is recognition, not appraisal, respect. Only a few people are fully satisfied with their own character and record, and they are fools. We may—some sad people do—completely lose appraisal respect for ourselves. But that does not mean or entail that we have lost recognition self-respect. It is, in fact, only in virtue of our recognition respect for ourselves—our sense that our character and achievements matter—that our misery at what we are or have done makes any sense at all.

Not everyone acts as if he had self-respect. Sydney Carton, until his redemption, drank his life away beside the winding sheet in his candle. But most of us do act as if we respected ourselves. We have ideas about how best to live, and, at least in fits and starts, we try to live up to those ideas. True, none of us lives self-consciously thinking day by day that he is giving performance value to his life or that he is facing up to the importance of his living well. Most people would hardly recognize these ideas, and it would not improve their lives to spend much time over them. Still we can best interpret our lives—make sense of how we live and what we feel—by supposing that we have at least an inarticulate but powerful sense of the importance of our lives, inarticulate but powerful beliefs about what achievements would give them performance value.

I assume you have that sense: that you suppose that it is important how your life goes. You want your life to be successful because you think its success is important, not the other way around. Is my assumption correct? Can you plausibly interpret the way you live as reflecting the rival assumption that it is only subjectively important how you live—important that you live well only if and because you want to live well? Please take some care over that important question.

You might think, “I don’t in fact care about living well. I care only about enjoying myself so far as I can; all my decisions and plans aim in that direction. As it happens, caring for others and achieving some personal success are among the things I enjoy. If I didn’t enjoy them, I wouldn’t bother. But living well, whatever that means, has no independent grip on me.” There is a well-known difficulty in that reply. Enjoyment in most cases is not a freestanding state of mind like hunger. It is normally an epiphenomenon of the conviction that we are living as we should.⑮ Of course, there are pleasures that are just pleasures: pleasures of the body, as we call them, that other animals share with us in some way, including some pleasures of sex and food. But pleasure in most of its modes—including most of the pleasure of food and sex—is not a frisson of pure feeling independent of belief about what gives rise to that feeling.⑯ We don’t just take pleasure. We take pleasure in something, and the pleasure we take is mostly contingent on thinking that it is good—living as one should—to take pleasure in it. True, some pleasures are “naughty”; we enjoy them for the opposite reason: because we know we shouldn’t. The phenomenology of enjoyment is almost always suffused, one way or another, with ethical flavor.

There are dramatic—and often comical—illustrations of that fact: people struggling to come to like sophisticated and expensive foods, for instance, because they want to be the kind of people who do. But even when they are drawn immediately to an activity they find intensely pleasurable, much of the pleasure is parasitic on a more complicated aesthetic evaluation. Listen to a skier describing the thrill of his sport: he reports not the flow of endorphins but the physical and visual sensations of the activity itself. Philosophers are fond of pointing out that no one wants the pleasure apart from the event: no skier would sacrifice an hour on the slopes for two hours connected to a laboratory pleasure machine.⑰ Yes, some people are proud to count themselves hedonists: they think that success in finding pleasure, and refining the pleasures they find, is a measure of how well they are living and have lived. Some of them think that their lives have gone worse because they have not found enough pleasure. But this meaning-of-life hedonism, as we might call it, is not an alternative to thinking it important to live well. It is only a sadly popular answer to the question of what living well means. Otherwise there could be no regret for pleasures missed: this makes sense only as regret for failure.

You might entertain a curter reply to my question: that you just want what you do and for no further reason. You do not think that your life has any importance or that there is a right and wrong way for you to live. You just happen to want to live in a particular way. You also happen to love cashew nuts; you can’t resist them when they are offered. Your overall plans and projects are just more and bigger cashew nuts. This down-market, crudely subjective interpretation of your behavior is indeed a genuine alternative to the grander one I proposed. But can you really accept it? Don’t you have an overall self-image: a sense of who you are that guides you in choices and styles, even, perhaps, in whether you like martinis or beer? Yes, you might say, you do have a self-image. You not only want to have certain things, like nuts, but also to be a certain way. That is just part of what you find you want. But that reply misunderstands the character of a person’s conception of himself. Self-images—choices of personal identity—play the critical role they do because they are constructed not of what we just find we like but of what we find we admire and think appropriate. These are themselves critical judgments: we aim to meet a standard, not just pick at random from a menu. Don’t you have other critical attitudes that also play a part in your life? Don’t you sometimes feel pride, shame, and regret, for instance? These critical attitudes make sense only to and for someone who thinks that it is important what he makes of his life and that he has a personal responsibility to create value in it. They make no sense for someone who just happens to want one kind of life. He has no platform on which to build any regret at all.

If these critical attitudes do play a prominent role in your emotional life, then their prominence confirms the more ambitious interpretation and rules out the down-market one. In fact, the critical attitudes are pervasive in almost everyone’s life, and I shall now assume that they are important in yours. They can surface anytime. But as I suggested, they are most dramatically in play from the perspective of a deathbed or near it. People are then often reminded, with pride, of the children they have raised, their war service, their reputation. I read once that when Beethoven was dying he said, “At least we made some music.” (Perhaps he didn’t say that, but he might have.) Other people are full of regret: at chances not taken, at opportunities, pleasures, and experiences missed. Sometimes the regret is intense and self-flagellating.

I mentioned two examples earlier. Ivan Illyitch, who thought he had all he wanted, suddenly thought that he had wanted the wrong things and realized, in panic, that it was too late to correct his mistake. For Sydney Carton it was not too late, because an extraordinary coincidence made it possible for him to do a far, far better thing than he had ever done, and to achieve his life’s redemption in doing it. Nothing like that could make any sense for someone whose concern for his life is only a matter of liking nuts. The critical attitudes make sense only if we accept that it is objectively, and not just subjectively, important what we do with our lives. We worry when we suspect that we have misunderstood and betrayed our responsibility; we take pride and comfort—we say our lives have meaning—when we believe we have met it.

Of course it is possible still to survey all these claims with a skeptical eye: to say that the objective importance I describe is a myth and that the pride, regret, shame, anxiety, and redemption most people feel are only part of the myth. But if that kind of hardheadedness tempts you, please remember the lesson of Part One. Your ethical skepticism cannot be an Archimedean, external skepticism. It can only be an internal skepticism, which means that you need just as strong a set of value judgments to support your nihilism as others need to support their very different intuitive sense. You cannot undermine their conviction of ethical responsibility with metaphysical arguments about the kinds of entities there are in the universe or sociological arguments about the diversity of opinions about what living well means. That would be to repeat the mistakes of external skepticism. You need an internally skeptical argument in two parts: positive claims about what would have to be true for our lives to have meaning, and then a negative case explaining why these conditions are not or cannot be met. Nihilism so earned has its own dignity. Macbeth found internal skepticism—indifference to the rest of his life—once he realized he was in the hands of supernatural tricksters. You are not, I expect, of his mind.

Authenticity (209)

Now we turn to the second principle of dignity. I called it the principle of authenticity, though that virtue has a mixed reputation now. In a famous essay Lionel Trilling contrasted authenticity with sincerity, to the discredit of the former.⑱ He had in mind, however, a sentimental and distinctly inauthentic popular use of the ideal. People say, without much thought, that they need to discover themselves and to be in touch with their deepest feelings. Our blue-eyed troubadour said, by way of anthem, that he did it his way. But a more genuine form of the ideal has had an important and entirely unsentimental life in our literature and in much of our most influential philosophy. Authenticity is central in the work of many of the most prominent modern philosophers—Kierkegaard and Nietzsche, for example, and also Sartre and other philosophers who called themselves Existentialists. Even Shakespeare’s villains and clowns—Gloucester and Iago, Parolles and Pistol—find moments of dignity in soliloquies of sudden and scorching authenticity in which they recognize and endorse who they really are.

Authenticity is the other side of self-respect. Because you take yourself seriously, you judge that living well means expressing yourself in your life, seeking a way to live that grips you as right for you and your circumstance. This need not be commitment to a single overriding ambition or to a set hierarchy of values. It may instead amount to what we call character, or what Nietzsche called a “style”: a way of being that you find suited to your situation, not one drawn mindlessly from convention or the expectations or demands of others.⑲ That does not necessarily mean eccentricity or even novelty. What is crucial is not that you live differently from others, but that you live in response to, rather than against the grain of, your situation and the values you find appropriate. These may be expressed in commitment to a revered tradition; they may be beautifully expressed in loving, providing for, and educating children. They may be expressed even in a life so severely constrained that only very limited choices are available. Or in a life that, seen from the outside, seems wholly conventional or even tedious. Nor does authenticity require studied planning or a road map drawn in youth. We can discover a character or style as we live, interpreting what we do as we do it, in search of rather than following a thread. Sartre called that “existential psychoanalysis.”⑳

It would be a mistake to find this account of authenticity elitist. On the contrary, it is elitist to suppose that only people of high education or imagination or sensibility or favored by wealth can lead authentic lives. Nor does endorsement require the absurdity of a constantly examined life. It does not require anyone explicitly to recognize that his life can have adverbial value and that he has a responsibility to seek that value. Few people wonder, tired in front of a television screen, whether they could add more value to their lives doing something else. Authenticity does make important demands, however. It requires a personal sense of character and commitment to standards and ideals out of which we act. It requires that we recognize some acts as self-betrayal.

Responsibility

In Chapter 6 I distinguished responsibility as a virtue from responsibility as a relation, and I also distinguished different forms of responsibility in both senses. The second principle of dignity demands both that I be responsible in the virtue sense and that I accept relational responsibility when appropriate. I do not treat an act as my own, as issuing from my personality and character, unless I regard myself as judgmentally responsible for it. People who blame their parents or other people or society at large for their own mistakes, or who cite some form of genetic determinism to absolve themselves of any responsibility for how they have acted, lack dignity, because dignity requires owning up to what one has done. “The buck stops here” is an important piece of ethical wisdom.

It is a more complex question how far authenticity requires that I accept liability responsibility for my acts. When may I properly demand that others bear all or part of a financial burden that I have assumed or that has fallen upon me? I may need money because I have suffered an accident that makes me unable to work or that requires expensive medical treatment, or because I have chosen to comb beaches instead of working, or because I have vowed to build a monument to my god.㉑ Does the right view of my own ethical responsibilities entail that it would be wrong to demand help in some of these circumstances but not in others? If it is part of living well not only to make choices but to live with the consequences of those choices, do I have reason to distinguish what I need because I have cancer from what I need because I chose not to work? Does it matter whether my needs are basic—I will starve without help—or spiritual? Does it matter whether I can support myself comfortably, but only at a boring job I loathe? These questions have direct analogues, as we shall see, both in moral questions about what we owe others and in important political questions about distributive justice. But they are also, distinctly, ethical questions.

Ethical Independence

Authenticity has another dimension: it stipulates what dignity demands we try to establish in our relations with other people. We must strive for independence. That does not mean trying to escape influence or persuasion. People cannot invent wholly new styles of living; we all live in an ethical culture that provides, at any time, the palette of recognizable ethical values from which possibilities can be drawn. We can rearrange conventional priorities among those values—we can become people of brute honesty instead of tact—and we can cleave to personal values that others disdain, like sexual abstinence. But it is not possible to live a life of medieval chivalry in Brooklyn now: that life required a social and even political background of which no sufficient vestiges remain. The opinions and models about how to live that are alive in our folklore, literature, and advertising are pervasive in our lives—we are born into and raise our children in the environment these create. This has been, in my own time, a rapidly shifting environment. Styles of living were possible and admired in the late 1960s and early 1970s that were not admired and were barely possible before; they remain, barely, possible now, but again they are not much admired.

We cannot escape influence, but we must resist domination. The distinction is of great ethical importance. Authenticity is in this aspect a narrowly relational concept. A person’s authenticity is not compromised by limitations of nature or circumstance: not because he lacks athletic ability, or because taxation makes it impossible for him to live as he would most like, or because he lives in a technologically backward community. He does not then have many colors on his palette, but the life he designs with the colors he has may be just as fully authentic, just as firmly the life that he rather than anyone else has designed. On the other hand he does not live authentically, no matter how great the range of options he is offered, if others forbid him some options otherwise available because they deem those options unworthy. The indignity lies in usurpation, not limitation. Authenticity demands that, so far as decisions are to be made about the best use to which a person’s life should be put, these must be made by the person whose life it is.

So authenticity is not autonomy, at least as some philosophers understand that protean concept. They suppose that autonomy requires only that some range of choices be left open by the sum of circumstance, whether these be natural or political. A person’s autonomy is not threatened, on this view, when government manipulates its community’s culture so as to remove or make less eligible certain disapproved ways of living, if an adequate number of choices remain so that he can still exercise the power of choice. Authenticity, on the other hand, as this is defined by the second principle of dignity, is very much concerned with the character as well as the fact of obstacles to choice. Living well means not just designing a life, as if any design would do, but designing it in response to a judgment of ethical value. Authenticity is damaged when a person is made to accept someone else’s judgment in place of his own about the values or goals his life should display.

This principle of ethical independence has evident political implications, and I shall identify and explore these later, in Chapter 17. Now, however, I emphasize the principle’s distinctly ethical importance: the role it plays in protecting the individual dignity that living well demands. Coercion is plain when it is achieved or threatened by the criminal law or by other forms of state action. In other circumstances more subtle discrimination is needed to distinguish influence from subordination. Someone who prizes his dignity must refuse to shape his ethical values out of fear of social as well as political sanction; he might decide that he lives well when he conforms to the expectations of others, but he must make that decision out of conviction, not laziness or that kind of fear.

Some orthodox religions establish priests or texts as supposedly infallible reporters of a god’s will; they declare the overriding importance of religious conviction to living well. Theocratic communities that impose an ethical regime by coercion compromise their subjects’ authenticity. In liberal political communities, in contrast, those who subject themselves to the ethical authority of their church do so voluntarily. They are nevertheless inauthentic if their adherence is so mechanical and unthinking that it does not flow into and shape the rest of their lives, if their religion is dutiful or social or self-congratulatory rather than a source of narrative energy. Fundamentalist Christians who denounce unbelievers and vote as they are told by televangelists, but who seem otherwise untouched by Christian charity, lead inauthentic lives even though their religion is not coerced.

Authenticity and Objectivity

The modern philosophers who preach authenticity most energetically deny the possibility of objective values: they insist that value can be created only by imposing a human will on an ethically inert universe. But that assumption makes it difficult to see why we should value authenticity at all. It might be said that some people just have a taste for authenticity. They just want to impose a narrative structure on their lives. But this seems unsatisfactorily lame. Our ethical responsibilities seem as categorical as our moral responsibilities: we think that authenticity is not a taste but a necessary virtue, that there is something wrong with an inauthentic life. We think that authenticity has objective importance; it is not just a taste some people happen to have.

Indeed, our common convictions assume something more, that we must seek the right values for our lives, the right narrative, not just any narrative. Otherwise we would be ethically free to choose any life so long as that life’s principle was coherent: a life of relentless, unmitigated indolence, for instance. The analogy to artistic value is useful here again. We do count a work of art’s integrity as indispensable to its value, but we do not count integrity as a standalone value. Otherwise we could not distinguish banal monotony from the brilliant coherence of complexity. That is equally true in ethics. We seek coherence in imposing a narrative on a life, but coherence endorsed by judgment, not just a coin flip. Nietzsche is sometimes taken to be a nihilist in value. But he had no doubt that some lives really are better than others. In fact he said he was aware of only three people whose lives were truly great. One of them was himself.㉒

It must therefore seem mysterious why the champions of authenticity have been so anxious to reject the very intelligibility of objective value; why they present authenticity as a replacement for the objective values they insist are only myths. I suggested an explanation in the Just So story of Chapter 1. Enlightenment and post-Enlightenment philosophers inherited part of the metaphysics of the age of religion: they continued to think that values can be objective only if the best explanation of how people come to hold those values also certifies the values as correct. Religion offers to show values objective in that way, but the secular philosophers turned their backs on religion. Nietzsche said that God was dead, and others that they must do without God’s help. They insisted that only naturalistic explanations are competent to explain why people hold the convictions they do, and they recognized that no such explanation could also vindicate those convictions. So they rejected all objective value.

But they could not deny the inescapable phenomenology of value in people’s lives. So they declared that it is we—human beings who long for value—who create that value for ourselves, by acts of will and fiat. This strategy fails because it does not redeem the phenomenology that inspires it. We do create our lives, but we do it aiming at value, not trying to invent it. Otherwise the struggle for authenticity these philosophers salute would be barren and pointless. We cannot escape, in how we think, an assumption that value exists independent of our will or fiat. So though we follow these philosophers in celebrating authenticity, we cannot accept their special form of external skepticism. Nor need we: once we break the supposed connection between the explanation and justification of our convictions, we have no need for their failed strategy.

The Religious Temperament (214)

For most people, living well requires a situated life: living appropriately to their circumstances—their own history, attachments, locality, region, values, and environment. E. M. Forster’s famous instruction—only connect—has its greatest resonance in ethics. People want their lives to have the kind of point we give some event or act by finding its place in a larger story or work of art, as a scene is given point by the whole play and an arc or diagnonal by the whole painting. We cherish complexity of reference in poetry, painting, and music not just or even for instruction but out of a sense of the beauty of what is embedded rather than what is detached. We cherish it also in life. We might try to capture the importance of connection in the idea of ethical parameters: features of our situation, such as our political and national identification, ethnic and cultural background, linguistic community, locality and region, religion, education, and associations that we can, if we wish, shape our life generally to embody and reflect. People sometimes describe the importance of such connection by saying that their nationality or ethnicity or some other parameter has a claim on them.

People similarly situated will give these parameters different orders of priority and will form different ideas about how to live accordingly. However, the larger and denser the canvas which these parameters occupy, the more each is interwoven with others, the more point a life reflecting these parameters can be seen to have. The most inclusive parameter of all, for many people, is their conception of the universe. They believe, as they often put it, that the universe houses some force “bigger than we are” and they want to live in some way in the light of that force. Thomas Nagel calls the desire for such a permeating connection the “religious temperament.”㉓

People who are religious in the orthodox way locate that force in their god. Some of them believe in Heaven and Hell and also in the power of their god as benefactor and disciplinarian even in this life. But many people who count religion as important in their lives have less instrumental connections in mind. Few of the Oxford chaplains and students who pray for the success of their college’s boat in the university races or the Siennese who take their contrada’s horse to church before their Palio actually believe in divine intervention, at least at this level of triviality. They take these occasions as opportunities to exhibit their religious convictions in the way they live.

Nagel describes a secular version of the same impulse. Even nonbelievers think, as he puts it, that the universe has a “claim” on us. Atheists too, he says, face this dramatic question: “How can one bring into one’s individual life a full recognition of one’s relation to the universe as a whole?” He considers three responses. The first is dismissive: it insists that nothing is missing from a life in which no such attempt is made. The second is humanist: it treats each individual life as an episode in the career of our species or, in a yet grander version, in the story of life evolving from its primitive beginnings. The third response is grander still: it places life, particularly human life, as itself part of the vastly larger story of the natural evolution of the universe. The unmatched exhilaration of that grandest answer tempts even some atheists to suppose some secular trajectory of purpose in the universe, a trajectory in which life and therefore their lives provide a pivotal event: the birth of consciousness.

Two large questions arise. First, why should people find value in this speculative aggrandizement of their individual lives? How do they benefit by seeing their lives as either a celebration of a transcendent but indifferent god or an event in an unconscious cosmic drama? Second, how can people shape their lives to record that aggrandizement? How can one bring it “into one’s individual life?” I just suggested an answer to the first question. We want to live in a way that is not arbitrary but is salient, suited to our circumstances. If our circumstances include the background of a cosmic drama, then we respond most appropriately by recognizing that noble background. Of course, we cannot think that the drama adds to the product values of our own lives. Our consciousness may be to the credit of the universe, perhaps its greatest achievement so far. But it is not our achievement. No, the value we think we find in our connection with the universe must be adverbial, performance value. Recognizing our tiny role is part of living well.

That makes the second question—Nagel’s question—crucial. How can recognizing a secular cosmic trajectory change how we live? Less grand parameters can easily make a difference. Some Jews who are atheists nevertheless celebrate religious holidays and even observe rituals of diet and weekly ceremony. They say that in that way they can belong, even without religion, to a cultural tradition they cherish. The second response Nagel identifies, humanism, can also change how we live. It might give us a heightened interest in conservation and in fighting climate change. Nietzsche, in Nagel’s reading, insisted on a still more dramatic consequence: he urged us to replace conventional values with others, like power, that better reflect our animal heritage and therefore better identify our place in evolution. Moral philosophers who speculate about human nature exhibit the same thirst for connection. No fact about how we are—about the natural phenomenon of human sympathy, for instance—can on its own yield any conclusion about how we should live. But the ethics of salience can provide a link. If there is such a thing as human nature, then living so as deliberately to express that nature is another avenue of connection to our situation, another way not to fall into an arbitrary life.

But what about the universe? We may be happy to learn that the appearance of conscious beings, at our stage of the long cosmic story, was not a chance accident but rather part of an unfolding plan. But how can this discovery change how we live? The universe has no temple at which we can worship. The discovery can, perhaps, affect our lives in a way parallel to worship: it can increase the interest we take in science, particularly cosmology. People who believe that the universe has evolved according to principles, and that they are an achievement of that evolution, will presumably try hard to secure at least an outsider’s sense of what the best scientists now think, the way a great many people take an intense interest, now often commercially exploited, in their own family history. I believe, however, that the main ethical importance of the secular “force larger than we are” conviction, for most people, is not to provide a distinct way of living but rather to provide a defense against the frightening thought that any way we live is arbitrary. If the universe just happens to be some way or other, if there is no purpose or plan at the most fundamental level of explanation, then it might seem absurd that we can give value to our lives by responding appropriately to more concrete parameters of our situation. How can we create any kind of value, even adverbial value, by responding to a personal or even species history that is itself only the most arbitrary of accidents? Nagel ends his discussion in pessimism. If there is no final order, he says, “since the cosmic question won’t go away and humanism is too limited an answer, a sense of the absurd may be what we are left with.”

But why? Suppose we think—as we have no reason not to think—that there is no point or purpose in the universe. Finally, at the distant end of the relentless discovery of unifying laws of nature, there are only facts—bare facts—about what there just was and is. We need not then ignore or dismiss Nagel’s cosmic question: we can answer it in that way. Of course it then would be absurd to try to live pretending to some great universal law. But what is absurd about living with no such pretense? If the value of living up to the universe is adverbial—if it is connection that counts—then why is it not as valuable to live up to the pointlessness of eternity, if the universe is pointless, as to live up to its purpose if it has one? For it is not true that nothing makes sense or creates value unless there is universal sense and value. Even if there is no eternal planner, we are planners—mortal planners with a vivid sense of our own dignity and of good and bad lives that we can create or endure. Why can we not find value in what we create, in response to what there just happens to be, as we find value in what an artist or musician makes? Why must value depend on physics? From this perspective, it is the assumption that ethical value does depend on eternity, that it can be undermined by cosmology, that seems absurd. It is just another in the endless string of temptations to violate Hume’s principle. But we have now touched issues among the deepest of moral and ethical philosophy. How vulnerable is value to science? What are the sources and character of absurdity? Turn to Chapter 10.

===============================================================================
p.457

➀ See Michael Smith, “The Humean Theory of Motivation,” and Philip Pettit, “Humeans, Anti-Humeans, and Motivation,” both in Andrew Fisher and Simon Kirchin, eds., Arguing about Metaethics (London: Routledge, 2006), 575, 602.

➁ See, e.g, John Stuart Mill, Utilitarianism, ed. J. M. Robson (1861; Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1963); Henry Sidgwick, The Methods of Ethics (London: Macmillan, 1874); Thomas Nagel, Equality and Partiality (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991), chapter 7.

➂ See my Sovereign Virtue: The Theory and Practice of Equality (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000), 242–54; and my “Foundations of Liberal Equality,” in Stephen Darwall, ed., Equal Freedom: Selected Tanner Lectures on Human Values (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1995), 190, 229–34.

➃ See, for example, Philip Roth’s imagined debate between Leo Tolstoy and Nathan Zuckerman on the issue (Roth, American Pastoral [New York: Vintage, 1998]).

➄ Though I was once tempted. See Dworkin, Sovereign Virtue, 263–67; and Dworkin, “Foundations of Liberal Equality,” 190, 195, 258–62.

➅ Christine Jolls has very usefully compared this distinction to one made by social scientists studying people’s contentment with their lives (Jolls, “Dworkin’s Living
Well and the Well-Being Revolution,” in Symposium: Justice for Hedgehogs: A Conference on Ronald Dworkin’s Forthcoming Book [special issue], Boston University Law Review 90, no. 2 [April 2010]: 641). Performance value, she suggests, may be compared to people’s ranking of their experiences one by one, while product value is comparable to their ranking of their life as a whole. She points out, however, correctly, that my remarks about the importance of the narrative quality of a life as a whole qualify these associations. I take the research she describes to suggest that people evaluate experiences differently when placed in the context of a whole life. Commuting ranks very low as an isolated event, but the tedium disappears in any evaluation of the life engaged in an occupation that commuting permits. The oncologist cannot enjoy his conversation with lung cancer victims, but he takes satisfaction in his career nevertheless. It is the isolation of the discrete lived events evaluated in the Princeton study she describes that, to my mind, renders the study, undoubtedly important in a variety of ways, less significant for ethics than the narrative evaluations that Jolls compares them with.

➆ See Thomas Nagel, Mortal Questions (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991); and Bernard Williams, “Moral Luck,” in Moral Luck (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981), 20–40.

➇ See Dworkin, Life’s Dominion (New York: Knopf, 1993), chapter 7.

➈ John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1971), 214–21.

➉ See the section “Science and Interpretation” in Chapter 7.

⑪ Dworkin, Sovereign Virtue; Dworkin, Is Democracy Possible Here? Principles for a New Political Debate (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2006).

⑫ Leon Kass, Life, Liberty and the Defense of Dignity: The Challenge for Bioethics (San Francisco: Encounter Books, 2004).

⑬ T. M. Scanlon, What We Owe to Each Other (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2000); Scanlon, Moral Dimensions: Permissibility, Meaning, Blame (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2008).

⑭ Stephen L. Darwall, “Two Kinds of Respect,” Ethics 88, no. 1 (October 1977): 36–49.

⑮ See James Griffin, Well Being: Its Meaning, Measure, and Moral Importance (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986), chapter 1.

⑯ There are pure cases of pain, not just the pain of injury or disease but even, I imagine, of extreme hunger. But even these are limited: much pain is also, like most pleasure, parasitic on judgment. Envy, disappointment, and shame can be intensely, even viscerally, painful but are parasitic on judgment.

⑰ See, e.g,, Robert Nozick, Anarchy, State, and Utopia (New York: Basic Books, 1974), 42–45. For a literary illustration of this point, see Ray Bradbury, Dandelion Wine (New York: Doubleday, 1957), chapter 13.

⑱ Lionel Trilling, Sincerity and Authenticity (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2006).

⑲ Friedrich Nietzsche, The Gay Science, trans. Walter Kaufman (New York: Vintage Books, 1974), §290: “One thing is needful—to ‘give style’ to one’s character—a great and rare art! It is practiced by those who survey all the strengths and weaknesses of their nature and then fit them into an artistic plan until every one of them appears as art and reason and even weaknesses delight the eye.”

⑳ Jean-Paul Sartre, Existential Psychoanalysis (Chicago: Regnery, 1962).

㉑ See Thomas Scanlon, “Preference and Urgency,” in The Difficulty of Tolerance: Essays in Political Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 70, 74.

㉒ Friedrich Nietzsche, Ecce Homo: How One Becomes What One Is (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).

㉓ See Nagel, “Secular Philosophy and the Religious Temperament,” in his book of the same name (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), chapter 1.

===============================================================================

Key concepts:

authenticity requires that we break out of distinctly moral considerations to ask what form of moral integrity fits best with how we want to conceive our personality and our life (192)

autonomy (212)

character/style (209/210)
- situation, situated life, ethical parameters
- values

consciousness (216)

dignity: self-respect and authenticity (203)
  self-respect: one's life must be a successful performance; objective importance of my living well
  authenticity: responsibility for identifying what counts as success

ethical parameters (215)

ethical principles (202):
  - self-respect: one must accept that it is a matter of importance that one's life be a successful performance rather than a wasted opportunity; one's life must have values
  - authenticity: each person has a special, personal responsibility for identifying what counts as success in his own life; he has a personal responsibility to create that life through a coherent narrative or style that he himself endorses; determine those values in life

Our ethical responsibilities are as categorical as our moral responsibilities (200)

explanation vs. justification (214)

guilt vs. luck (201)
  - guilt tracks fault
  - regret tracks luck

incorporation vs. integration (202)

independence (211)
- social and political background
- influence vs. domination

living well means striving to create a good life, but only subject to certain constraints essential to human dignity (195)
We are charged to live well by the bare fact of our existence as self-conscious creatures with lives to lead (196)
giving ethical meaning to a life (198)

moral luck (201)

moral principles must be categorical (192)

morality is essential to living well (202)

narrative (197)

parameters (215)

performance (197): the final value of our lives

performance value (197)

product value (197)

religious temperament (215)

respect
- recognition
- appraisal

responsibility (210)

science: the intrinsic goal of seeking the truth and our justifying reasons for seeking that truth (203)

self-image (207)

relation to the universe (215)
- dismissive
- humanist
- part of the universe