10 Free Will and Responsibility (219)

Two Threats to Responsibility

I have been writing about responsibility in its various modes and forms, so far ignoring a view popular among philosophers that there is no such thing. People are responsible for their acts only when they are in control of what they do—only, in the standard philosophical jargon, when they have and act out of a free will. You are not responsible for the injury when someone else pushes you into a blind beggar or when a hypnotist makes you steal from the beggar’s cup. Many philosophers—millions of other people as well—believe that this apparently innocent observation is wholly destructive of at least large and central parts of ethics and morality. They press what we might call the “no free will” challenge in the following form.

“People are never actually in control of their own behavior, even when it seems to them that they are. Their will is never free because their behavior is always caused by some combination of forces and events entirely beyond their control acting on their brains. It is never true that they could have done anything else but what they did. Indeed, people’s decisions are not only caused by prior events, but do not even cause the actions for which they think themselves responsible. Responsibility is therefore an illusion, and it is always inappropriate to hold people blameworthy or to punish them for what they do.”

It will be useful to name the different phenomena I just mentioned. I use “decision” to describe the familiar conscious event we sense as deciding; I mean to include not just reflective, thoughtful decisions we take after deliberation, but also the unreflective decisions we make minute-by-minute to continue what we are doing rather than do something else.➀ You took a reflective decision when you decided to read this book, I assume, but I hope only unreflective ones to continue reading. I understand “determinism” to hold that every one of these decisions, reflective as well as unreflective, is fully determined by processes and events that precede it and lie outside the control of the decider. “Epiphenomenalism” denies more: it denies that decisions even figure in the causal chain that ends in movements of nerve and muscle.➁ It supposes that the internal sense of having decided to do something is only a side effect of the physical and biological events that have actually produced the behavior decided upon. Epiphenomenalists think, for instance, that the series of physical events that culminated in my typing the last word in this sentence began before I actually decided which word to type assiduously. It began while I was still, or so I thought, hesitating over my choice of words. If every conscious decision is only a side effect, then whatever part of me forms that decision, whether we call it my “will” or by some other name, can hardly be in charge of what happens. It is only the fraud of Oz, pulling levers and pluming steam to no effect whatsoever.

Determinism and epiphenomenalism may both be true: I am not competent to judge either of them as scientific theories. Neither has been demonstrated to be true. Everything is possible. Every Tuesday brings fresh surprises about brain geography, physics, and chemistry, about potent alleles on neglected chromosomes, and about the interrelations among all these and our mental life. Every dinner party brings fresh speculation about the sexual reasoning of baboons, the religious lives of chimpanzees, the reptilian brain beneath your cerebrum, and the neo-Darwinian explanation of the trolley problem I discuss in Chapter 13. Our grandchildren had better be ready for anything.

The Issues

The free will challenge is probably the single most popular philosophical issue to have escaped the textbooks and entered popular literature and imagination: it is the theme of earnest speculation everywhere. The philosophical literature is in itself vast and dauntingly complex.➂ (Two particularly influential and contrasting positions are those of Thomas Nagel and Peter Strawson.➃) This literature weaves together three groups of issues that we should take care to separate. We find, first, discussions of the causes and consequences of thought and action. Is all human behavior fully determined by prior events over which people themselves have no control? If not, is some behavior caused by random, chance physical or biological events over which, equally, people have no control? Or can some faculty of the human mind—the “will”—exercise a kind of purposeful agency that is not itself caused by anything but its own occurrence? I shall call these “scientific” issues, but many philosophers would regard this name as inappropriate. They think that at least one of the questions I listed—whether a human will can act spontaneously as an uncaused cause—is a metaphysical question rather than one of biology or physics. Thomas Nagel finds the last hypothesis—that a complete explanation of action can begin in an act of will with no prior physical or biological explanation—unintelligible. But he also finds it irresistible.➄

The literature also contains discussions of what is styled “freedom.” Under what circumstances is someone free to act as he wishes? Is his freedom compromised only when he is subject to some external constraint—only when he is tied up or locked up, for example? Or when he is mentally ill? Or when he cannot govern himself or control his appetites as he would wish? Or when he does not behave as right reason and true morality require? Or is his freedom illusory whenever his choices and behavior are inevitable, given prior events or forces beyond his control? Is he free, that is, only if and when his own will acts as the uncaused cause of his behavior?

Finally we find discussions of our own topic: judgmental responsibility. When is it appropriate for someone to judge his own behavior critically and for others to judge him that way? When is it appropriate for him to feel pride or guilt, for example, or for others to praise or blame him? Whenever he acts rather than is acted upon? Whenever he makes decisions for himself rather than being, for instance, hypnotized? Or only when his will is the uncaused cause of his actions? These questions about responsibility hang like swords over Chapter 9. I argued that people have a foundational ethical responsibility to live well, to make something of their lives, and that living well is a matter of making appropriate decisions over one’s life. But if no one is ever responsible for his decisions, the idea of living well or badly makes little sense. No decision can ever make a life better or worse lived.

It is crucial now to notice the large logical space between the first set of issues—the scientific or metaphysical questions that can be answered, if at all, only through empirical investigation or philosophical speculation—and the last set, about responsibility, which are independent ethical and moral issues. Because Hume’s principle applies just as firmly in the ethical context as it does in the moral context of Part One, no conclusion about responsibility can follow directly from any answers we give to questions in the first set. Any inference from the first to the third set of issues requires a further evaluative premise. The literature of the free will problem has not, in my view, paid sufficient attention to this requirement—perhaps because philosophers assume that it is obvious which ethical and moral principles are available to bridge the gap. I believe that this is very far from obvious.

The second set of issues—about freedom—are not, however, independent of the other two groups. There is no pertinent question about whether people are free that is not either the scientific or the ethical question in disguise. Some people use “freedom” simply to mean nondeterminism: people are not really free, they assume, unless determinism is false. Others use the word simply to mean responsibility: they say that people are or are not free when they mean that they are or are not judgmentally responsible for their actions. Neither of these ways of speaking is mistaken: it is not a linguistic mistake to say either that people are not really free because determinism is true or that people are really free, even if determinism is true, when they are subject to no external constraint. But talk of freedom in this context is unhelpful and often sponsors confusion. I propose not to discuss freedom much in this chapter, even though my subject is the free will controversy.

Classical discussions of free will and responsibility almost always begin in a moral rather than an ethical issue. Is it right to criticize someone else for what he did when he was hallucinating or suffering from some other mental disorder? Or if he had an unfortunate upbringing or acted under duress? Would it be fair to jail someone who committed a crime while acting under one or another of these disabilities? These questions and the anticipated answers prepare the way for the supposed impact of determinism. If everyone’s actions are determined by forces beyond his control, in the way we think mentally ill people’s actions often are, then it is just as unfair ever to blame anyone as it is to blame the mentally ill. I propose to begin differently: by asking how and why people normally hold themselves responsible for what they have done, and why, in some circumstances, they do not and should not do so. I begin, that is, in ethics rather than morality. That different tack brings this chapter into line with the general strategy of the book; it allows us to concentrate on something important that the more classical approach tempts us to ignore. When we begin in the first rather than the third person, we pay more attention to how it feels to be confronted with a decision.

The Stakes

Chapter 6 distinguished modes and varieties of responsibility. We concentrated in that chapter on the virtue of responsibility; now we are concerned with one form of relational responsibility. Someone has judgmental responsibility for an act if it is appropriate to appraise his act against critical standards of performance: of blame or praise. Further terminology will now be helpful. The literature of the free will problem divides philosophers into two camps. Compatibilists believe that full judgmental responsibility is consistent with determinism, and incompatibilists that it is not. Some incompatibilists are optimists: they believe that judgmental responsibility is genuine because they believe, as a matter of either science or metaphysics or both, that behavior is not always determined by past events beyond the agent’s control. Other incompatibilists are pessimists: they believe that all behavior is determined by past events and that it is therefore never appropriate to attribute judgmental responsibility to anyone. Can pessimistic incompatibilism be right?

It is important to notice, right from the start, that we cannot actually believe it. I do not mean only that we would find it hard to believe the way someone might find it hard to believe that a lover has betrayed him or that slavery was overall good for the slaves. You cannot be convinced, even intellectually, that you are not responsible for your actions, because you cannot make any reflective decision without judging which decision it would be better to make. You may be convinced, after you pass the beggar by, that you were forever destined to ignore him. Nevertheless, as you approach him you cannot repeal either the thought or the fact that you have a decision to make. You cannot lift yourself above yourself just to watch how you choose. You must choose. You might pause, frozen in your tracks, to see what will happen. But then nothing will happen, and even then you have chosen to stop, and eventually you will choose to do something else.

I repeat: you cannot choose, except in particularly banal matters, without supposing that there is a better and a worse choice for you to make; you cannot choose, that is, without supposing that your choice is a matter appropriate for self-criticism. You cannot wrestle apart the thought “What shall I do?” from the thought “Which decision would it be better for me to make?” This need not be a matter of moral or even ethical criticism: it rarely is. You may criticize yourself on what you take to be purely instrumental grounds—Can you afford to give to every beggar you confront? But you will still be holding your choice to a normative standard, still considering what reasons you have to act one way or another, not treating your action as a tic or a cough.

After you choose, you might be able to treat your decision that way: you might insist, even to yourself, that because you were destined to ignore the beggar, you are not to blame and have nothing to regret in having done so. But the threatened conclusion, that you never have judgmental responsibility, claims more than that. It claims that your decision, like a cough you cannot stop, is immune from critical judgment from the start, and that is what you cannot believe as you act. In the first person, deciding includes assuming judgmental responsibility; the connection is internal and independent of any premise about the causes of decision. Pessimistic noncompatibilism is not an intellectually stable position. It asks us to believe what we cannot believe. You may say: I can believe in pessimistic incompatibilism even though I do not act as if I believe it; I’m only pretending. That misses the point: there is no way to behave as if you did believe it, so no ground for attributing the belief to yourself.

What about third-person judgments? Could we continue to judge other people in the way we do if we accepted pessimistic incompatibilism? Philosophers normally focus, as I said, on third-person judgments: incompatibilists argue that if determinism is true, then it is wrong to blame or punish anyone for what he does; unfair, in Galen Strawson’s hyperbole, for God to send anyone to hell.➅ They insist that this would not rule out any number of other ethical or moral judgments. It would still be possible, they say, to declare that a criminal has done something morally wrong even though he is not blameworthy for having done it. Or that he has a bad character. It would still be possible to think, they say, that someone has acted prudently or imprudently or that some states of affairs are better than others. I believe all this is wrong.➆ Morality is an integrated web of standards. It is not a collection of detachable modules, each of which can be eliminated, leaving the rest even more or less intact. Judgmental responsibility is the weft of all moral fabric.

If I cannot believe that I myself lack judgmental responsibility, even when I accept that my own actions are determined, I have no ground for supposing that anyone else lacks judgmental responsibility just because his actions are determined. Some lawyers and criminologists insist that we must abandon traditional criminal law, with its apparatus of guilt and punishment, and substitute only therapeutic treatment because people are never responsible for what they do.➇ They contradict themselves. If no one ever has judgmental responsibility, then officials who treat accused criminals as responsible for their actions are not responsible for their own actions, and it is therefore wrong to accuse them of acting unfairly. Of course, it would then also be wrong of me to accuse the criminologists of acting wrongly in accusing the officials of acting wrongly, because the criminologists are not responsible either. And wrong of me to accuse myself of accusing them wrongly, because I am not responsible either. And so on. This recursive nonsense shows, even if nothing else did, that we cannot believe the proposition on which it hinges, which is that we all lack judgmental responsibility for anything.

There is yet a further difficulty. If determinism extinguishes our judgmental responsibility, then it must extinguish our intellectual responsibility as well. So we would act no more responsibly in declaring determinism true when we have read the literature, done the experiments, and reflected for a decade than if we had simply thrown dice and come up boxcars. If pessimistic determinism is true, no one could responsibly think that he had made a wise decision in believing it. He had no choice but to believe it.

Six Billion Characters in Search of a Life (225)

The Responsibility System

The fact that no one can actually believe pessimistic incompatibilism is not in itself much of an argument against it. We can’t believe Zeno’s “proof” that an arrow never reaches its destination, but we need to explain why that proof is wrong.➈ Perhaps we can find no decent reason not to believe what we cannot believe; perhaps we are condemned to that kind of incoherence. As I said, there may be no consistent and interpretively satisfying theory of judgmental responsibility. But whether that is so depends on the ethical and moral issues we now begin to explore. No doubt the causes of our decisions do in some way affect our judgmental responsibility for those decisions. The question is, how? To repeat: we seek an ethical principle that defines the connection.

We should begin with our ordinary ideas about when judgmental responsibility is extinguished or abated. Remind yourself of the ordinary economy of judgmental responsibility: the way you and others use the idea, day to day. Deliberate behavior has an internal life: there is a way it feels deliberately to act. We intend to do something, and we do it. There is a moment of final decision, the moment when a die is cast, the moment when the decision to act merges with the action decided on. That internal sense of deliberate action marks the distinction, essential to our ethical and moral experience, between acting and being acted upon: between pushing and being pushed. We think that we are judgmentally responsible for what we do, but not for what happens to us: for driving too fast but not for being hit by lightning. Our more complex ideas about responsibility depend on refinements of these crude ideas.

We distinguish the normal occasions in which people decide to act not just from those in which they are acted upon but also from those when they act under the control of someone else, as in hypnosis or higher-tech forms of mind control, or when they are victims of certain forms of mental deficiency or illness. We say, in the mind-control case, that the decision reflects not their own judgment or intention but rather that of the mind-controllers. We say, in the mental deficiency case, that though they acted on their own judgment or intention, they nevertheless ought not to be held responsible, because they lacked some capacity essential to responsibility.

We distinguish two such capacities. First, to be responsible, people must have some minimal ability to form true beliefs about the world, about the mental states of other people, and about the likely consequences of what they do. Someone who is unable to grasp the fact that guns can harm people is not responsible when he kills. Second, people must have, to a normal degree, the ability to make decisions that fit what we might call their normative personality: their desires, preferences, convictions, attachments, loyalties, and self-image. Genuine decisions, we think, are purposive, and someone who cannot match his final decisions to any of his desires, plans, convictions, or attachments is incapable of responsible action.

The responsibility system we have now briefly summarized plays a crucial role in the ethical project described in Chapter 9. Living well is a matter of making the right decisions; how well we have lived is a matter of how far we did that. But not every decision counts: we do not count what we did before we gained the capacities the responsibility system makes prominent—the capacity to form true beliefs and to match our decisions to our values—or (if we are later in a position to identify these) decisions we made while we had lost those capacities. The latter decisions, at least, figure in the judgment of how good our lives have been. Any period of insanity or deep compulsive obsession endangers the goodness of a life. But when we make the different judgment whether someone has lived well or badly, we filter out these infirm decisions. A person who is mentally incapacitated for substantially all his life has not, in the ethical sense, lived at all. Others pity him for the horribly damaged life he has endured, but they do not blame him or suppose that if he recovered in time he should blame himself.

When the responsibility system is described that abstractly, it seems uncontroversial; it is at least very widely accepted. Much of the system becomes controversial, however, when specified in greater detail. People disagree, for instance, about whether someone is judgmentally responsible who is unable to resist impulses stemming from blind rage, or who is forced to act against his convictions by threats of grievous harm, or whose sense of right and wrong has been warped by watching violence on television. A plausible theory of responsibility must explain the wide appeal of the abstract responsibility system and also explain when and why its details become controversial.

Two Conceptions of Control

The responsibility system embeds, hidden from view, ethical principles of the kind we seek—principles that connect the causes of our decisions with our responsibility for those decisions. Which principles are these? That is an interpretive question of the kind by now familiar in this book. We need to ask: Which ethical and moral principles provide the best overall justification of the system? It might be thought—I believe it is commonly thought—that the strongest argument for incompatibilism can be identified in that way. We cannot justify our ordinary convictions about judgmental responsibility, on this story, except by making responsibility depend on the ultimate causes of an action.

We must test that claim. Join me in a speculative experiment. We have discovered that determinism makes sense and is true: every one of our thoughts and acts has been made necessary by prior events or forces or states of affairs over which we had no control. In what way, if any, does that discovery undermine the point and sense of our responsibility system? We realize that our discovery cannot change the way we actually live. After the original shock, we find we must live pretty much as before. We are then like characters in a play who know they are scripted but lack the script—a variation of the situation of Pirandello’s Six Characters in Search of an Author. We know we cannot live but as our author, nature, has decided. But we must nevertheless live: we, like Pirandello’s characters, must still decide minute by minute what to do. We must still decide what the best reasons are and require.

Should we think ourselves absurd for carrying on in that way, even if we can’t help it? Are we then like cigarette addicts or alcoholics, unable to kick the responsibility habit? We might be tempted to that view of our situation—many philosophers have been tempted—by the following line of thought. The responsibility system shows that we have responsibility only when we are in control of our behavior. Only when we are in charge can we give or deny ethical value to our lives. That explains why our responsibility system exempts acts under hypnosis or while we are insane. But if determinism is true, then we are never in control. So we can never create that kind of value, no matter how we act: we are only marionettes pretending that we are pulling the strings ourselves.

But this is too quick. This argument depends not just on the assumption that control is necessary to responsibility, but on a particular understanding of what control means. It supposes that someone is not in control when his decision is determined by external forces in the way determinism holds that all behavior is. I shall call this the “causal” sense of control, because it makes judgmental responsibility turn on the ultimate, originating historical causes of decision. We are in control when the causal chain that explains how we act travels back only to an impulse of our own will, not when it travels further back to past states and events that, together with natural laws, explain that act of will. There is an alternate understanding of what it means to be in control. On this different view, an agent is in control when he is conscious of facing and making a decision, when no one else is making that decision through and for him, and when he has the capacities to form true beliefs about the world and to match his decisions to his normative personality—his settled desires, ambitions, and convictions. This is the “capacity” sense of control.

The two senses of control provide two different principles as candidate ethical foundations for the responsibility system: the causal control principle and the capacity control principle. The first insists that causal control is essential to responsibility; the second that capacity control is essential. Many philosophers—and many nonphilosophers—assume that the causal principle is obviously sound and the capacity principle just an evasion.➉ But the difference between the two principles is more profound. They take very different views of the nature, point, and, as we might put it, the location of judgmental responsibility.

The causal principle views the question of responsibility from outside an agent’s own ordinary sense of his situation. It asks us to step back from our day-to-day life to try to see our situation as an all-knowing god might view it. It places our mental life in the context of the natural world; it asks us to try to explain our processes of decision the way we explain the workings of our internal organs. It ties the ethical judgment of responsibility to the scientific judgment of causation. The capacity principle, on the contrary, locates responsibility within the brackets of an ordinary life lived from a personal perspective. It makes an assumption of ethical independence: that our conscious decisions are, in principle, crucially and independently important in their own right and that their importance is in no way contingent on any remote causal explanation. Even if we are Pirandello characters, our decisions are genuine facts and whether we live well depends on how good those decisions are.

The two principles are contradictory: we cannot assume that one is true without denying the other. We cannot defeat the capacity principle by appealing to the control principle. It would beg the question to say that the former cannot be right because people cannot be responsible for what they were determined to do. Nor can we defeat the causal principle by appealing to the capacity principle. It would equally beg the question to argue that the control principle fails because the ethical importance of a decision depends on its circumstances, not its causal pedigree. We need denser arguments and these can only be interpretive.

I will offer an interpretive case for the capacity principle. In my view, it makes much better sense of the rest of our ethical and philosophical opinion. The causal principle, on the other hand, is an interpretive orphan: we can find or construct no good reason why it should be part of our ethics. But argument may in the end be unavailing. Interpretation depends finally on conviction, and anyone’s choice between the two principles will probably reflect deeper attitudes and dispositions that lie beyond argument. In Chapter 9 we encountered a very closely related issue: Is life absurd if the universe is accidental? That issue and the question of judgmental responsibility that we are now exploring seem to be mirror images of each other. They both turn on the independence of ethics from science.

Whether a philosopher joins the compatibilist or incompatibilist camp turns on which of the two principles of control he adopts and therefore on how far he thinks ethics is independent. The Greek dramatists assumed a form of the capacity principle; their heroes were responsible even when the gods caused them to act as they did.⑪ Aristotle, Hobbes, Hume, and, among prominent contemporary philosophers, Thomas Scanlon, also accepted the capacity principle.⑫ Hume said that whether someone is in control depends on whether he could have acted otherwise if he had wanted to.⑬ Hume’s view is sometimes criticized by pointing out that if determinism is true, someone could not have wanted to do anything but what he did want to do.⑭ That misses his point: he was endorsing an ethically independent attitude. Scanlon has suggested what he called a “psychological” test of responsibility; he challenges “the incompatibilist” to explain why that test is not satisfactory.⑮ However, many contemporary philosophers assume that the causal principle is correct.⑯ They think no one has judgmental responsibility when there is available in principle a full external causal explanation of what he wanted and did.

This deep contrast in opinion has, I believe, a further dimension. The idea of ethical responsibility I described in Chapter 9 rests on a fundamental assumption: that a human life can have value in the way it is lived. That assumption seems to suppose that self-conscious creatures are special in the universe: that they are not just more of the homogenized physical stuff that surrounds them. But why are they special? Billions of people find confirmation of their special importance in religion. They think a god gave us free will as a miraculous act of grace. Or, if not, that at least our predestination is decreed not by a soulless mechanics but by a supreme intelligence who made us, alone, in his image. Enlightenment deism or atheism blocked that escape for most philosophers, however, even as Enlightenment physics magnified the threat.

We might nevertheless hope for a different kind of independence from the natural order. There are two possibilities. We might hope that our decisions and acts actually are free of the causal transactions of the physical and biological world: that somewhere, perhaps only in a noumenal world, we have a free will, whatever that means. That hope encourages us to take up the external perspective of the causal principle because it can be redeemed only there. But once we do, our hope becomes vulnerable to scientific discovery or metaphysical skepticism. Or, on the other hand, we might think that the fact of our consciousness itself, together with the phenomenal challenge of lives to lead, itself gives us all the dignity we need or should crave. The universe may know what we will decide, but we do not. So we must struggle to choose, and on this view we do create value—the adverbial value of living well—just through our choices. We might reinterpret the long existentialist tradition in philosophy, or at least extract what is most persuasive in it, through that second view of our dignity. It gives a different and more plausible meaning to Jean-Paul Sartre’s declaration that our existence precedes our essence.⑰ Each of these two possibilities has its own emotional appeal. Which makes better sense of the rest of what we think?

Causal Control? (231)

I emphasize yet again that the two contrasting principles—the causal and the capacity principles—are ethical, not physical or biological or metaphysical, principles. It is hardly obvious which better fits and justifies our familiar responsibility system: each of them has been embraced by many distinguished philosophers. We must pursue our interpretive question at some length. We begin with causal control. I am an adult, suppose, of normal intelligence. I do not suffer from mental disease, and my decisions mainly correlate in the normal way with my preferences and convictions. I see a beggar on the street, and I wonder whether to give him something. I quickly rehearse reasons for and against. He looks hungry; I won’t miss a dollar or two. He’ll spend it on drugs; I gave at the office. I decide against giving; I walk past. I assume that I am judgmentally responsible for my action, that it makes sense for me or others to blame me for stinginess or praise me for good judgment.

If the causal principle is correct, however, my assumption of responsibility is hostage to science or mystery. If my decision was causally determined by forces or events in place before I was born, then my sense of responsibility, however unshakeable, is only an illusion. If, on the other hand, my decision to walk past the beggar was uncaused by anything in the past, if it represented a spontaneous intervention in the causal order that flowed from my brain to my legs, then my sense of responsibility is genuine: I am responsible. The causal principle might seem, at first blush, to capture the essence of responsibility. If external forces made me do something, how can I be myself responsible for doing it? But in another respect the principle seems arbitrary, even at first blush. How can the presence or absence of some physical or biological or metaphysical process of which I cannot possibly be aware as I act, and that cannot possibly be revealed in any account, either introspective or observational, of the intentions, motives, convictions, and emotions with which I act, make any moral or ethical difference at all?

Epiphenomenalism

The causal principle has two components: it denies responsibility if either determinism or epiphenomenalism is true. I begin with the second component: we are responsible only if our decisions are causally potent. Assume that everything you do is initiated in your nervous and muscular system before you make a decision to do it. All your decisions, from the simplest to the most complex and far-reaching, are only part of an after-the-fact documentary film playing on the screen of your mind: what you do causes your sense of having decided to do it, rather than the other way around. The hypothesis is of course amazing. But what can it have to do with judgmental responsibility?

Responsibility is an ethical or moral matter: it attaches to final decisions whether or not these are causally effective. We might say that someone who decides to injure someone else, but whose decision is only epiphenomenal, is guilty merely of an attempt. He is trying with all his heart to do something bad. But he fails because his decision is not the cause of what happens. He wants to kill his rival, he decides to do so, the gun he is holding fires, the rival dies. But it wasn’t he who killed him; it was (we might say) only his programmed reptilian brain. So what? At least in this kind of case an attempted murder is morally as bad as a successful murder.

Lawyers like to invent cases like this one: A puts arsenic in B’s coffee intending to kill him, but just as B is about to drink, C shoots him dead. A is not guilty of murder but only of attempted murder. Nevertheless A is morally as much at fault as if he were a murderer; that is the assumption that makes the lawyers’ question—why should A be punished less severely than C?—difficult to answer. Lawyers discover or invent policy or procedural reasons to explain why attempted murder should be punished less severely than murder. We want to encourage people to change their minds at the last moment; we can’t be sure that A wouldn’t have warned B just before he sipped the coffee. But these reasons of policy have no application here. So why shouldn’t we say that the person who tries to kill his rival but fails, because his decision is not the cause but only an epiphenomenal consequence of his behavior, is nevertheless morally culpable? He is judgmentally responsible for having tried, for having done his best.⑱

I agree that this comparison between the action of a single person and those of two distinct people is strange. It is strange to treat a person and his reptilian brain as separate actors, the way we treat A and C in the lawyers’ imagined case. But that artificial bifurcation of a person is exactly what the causal control principle itself relies on. We normally treat people as whole people: the same person who has a mind also has a brain, nerves, and muscles, and his acting involves all of these. The causal control principle separates mind from body, personifies part of mind as an agent called the will, and then asks whether that agent actually causes the body it inhabits to act in a certain way or is only a fraud pulling levers disconnected from anything. It is an odd picture, and you may think the causal principle odd for that reason alone. If we accept the picture, however, we must hold the person-within-the-person responsible for what he has tried to do, unless we have some other reason for exempting him.

Determinism and Chance

I said earlier that we could not integrate the causal control principle with our other beliefs if we thought determinism true, because the principle would then contradict convictions of judgmental responsibility that we cannot disbelieve. In fact the principle finds no basis in the rest of our convictions even if we assume that determinism is false or not generally true. Consider this fantasy. Imagine that determinism is false as a universal claim. People often make decisions caused only by an original act of will. There are, however, exceptions. Sometimes people’s decisions are indeed only the result of past events and forces wholly beyond their control. But we know this only as a possibility sometimes realized. We have no statistics about how often it is realized. No one can tell the difference on any particular occasion: no one can know which of his decisions is original and which was determined. They all seem, from the internal phenomenal perspective, free choices. It seems bizarre to suppose that you are responsible for some of your decisions but not others though no one can ever tell which. If you nevertheless accept the causal principle, how are you supposed to criticize yourself, even after you act? You can’t even think that you are probably responsible for the damage you caused. Or probably not.

One day a breakthrough produces an instrument that can identify which decisions were determined and which not, though only through evidence not detectable until two weeks after the act in question. Two men are arrested for plotting and then executing a murder in cold blood; after lengthy police tests, the instrument declares that one of their wills, by a inscrutable mental spasm of some kind, initiated the causal chain that produced his crime, while the other’s act was determined from the beginning of time. That difference produced no difference in the way the two villains thought, plotted, or acted, and nothing but the new instrument could have detected it. Should the second villain be freed and the first jailed for life or executed? That seems absurd: the hidden causal distinction seems too disconnected from anything we think should matter in a decision of that kind. The responsibility system does make distinctions in blameworthiness. But the qualities that lead us to excuse young children and mentally ill people are also qualities that affect their behavior and their lives, and our relations with them, in hundreds of other ways. People who lack the capacity to reason or properly to organize their desires lead very different lives from those who have those capacities. People who are hypnotized or whose brains are manipulated by mad scientists have become subordinated to alien wills. For all such people, their lack of responsibility is a general status, not a haphazard piece of quantum whimsy.

If I am right that it would be crazy to make responsibility turn on what the instrument displays in my fantasy, then the causal principle must be wrong. It makes no difference how we change the fantasy. I might have supposed, not that everyone’s behavior is sometimes determined and sometimes not, but that some people’s behavior is always determined and other people’s behavior never is. It would make no ethical or moral sense to treat the two classes differently once an instrument had identified their category. Because the causal control principle would seem arbitrary in these various different circumstances, we cannot accept it as a sound ethical or moral principle. If the bare, brute fact of determinism does not undermine judgments of responsibility when that fact is randomly distributed, it cannot undermine them when it is pervasive.

Determinism and Rationality

The causal principle seems bizarre in a further way. People make decisions on the basis of their beliefs and values. These are the ingredients of a rational decision. But we do not have the kind of control over our beliefs and values that the causal principle demands for the decision itself. You can’t choose your beliefs about the world by an act of free will. On the contrary, you hope that your beliefs are determined by how the world is. Nor can you just choose your values: your tastes, preferences, convictions, allegiances, and the rest of your normative personality. I argued in Chapter 4 that our moral convictions are not caused by moral truth: the causal impact hypothesis is false. If it were true, however, then our convictions would of course be caused by something outside us—moral fact—not an originating will inside. If it is false, as I believe, then any competent causal explanation of convictions must lie in the kind of personal history I described in that chapter, which means that a complete explanation would include not only facts about a person’s genes, family, culture, and environment but also the causes of these: it would include the laws of physics and chemistry and the history of the universe. This is even more evidently true of our tastes, desires, and preferences. We cannot create these from nothing by some act of will.

Yes, to some degree people are able to influence their preferences and convictions. We struggle to like caviar or sky diving or to become better people by enrolling in churches or extension philosophy courses. But we do this only because we have other convictions or preferences or tastes we did not choose. People try to train themselves to like caviar or skiing because for a variety of reasons they desire to be the kind of people who do like them, and they did not choose to have that desire. They join churches or self-help groups to acquire or strengthen convictions they already want to have. The responsibility project I described in Chapter 6 requires people to try to work their various convictions into a coherent and integrated whole. But these efforts at integrity respond to still deeper aspirations that we do not originate by any act of will either, and they are, sadly, often frustrated by what we find we just cannot believe.

The fact that we cannot just choose what to believe or want makes the causal control principle ethically and morally otiose. If I am rational, I choose as my beliefs and desires directly; in that sense my decision is caused by factors beyond my control, even if I have free will. Why should I then be thought more responsible if I had the power to act irresponsibly—that is, contrary to my beliefs, convictions, and preferences? The causal principle is offered, remember, as an interpretation of the more abstract principle that people are liable to praise or blame only when they are in control of their own behavior. Someone who acts irrationally is not in control, and it therefore seems perverse to insist that a person is not in control unless he has the power to lose control. We might as well say that a society isn’t free if it doesn’t allow people to sell themselves into slavery.

Galen Strawson is right: causal control over actual decisions cannot provide judgmental responsibility on its own. “To be truly morally responsible for what you do,” he declares, “you must be truly responsible for the way you are—at least in crucial mental respects.”⑲ Because we cannot be responsible for the way we are in these respects, he concludes, responsibility is an illusion, whether or not determinism is true. Strawson’s premise is inescapable and important. If the key to judgmental responsibility is causal control, then we are not responsible unless we can freely choose the beliefs and preferences that are the ingredients of our decisions, as well as the decisions themselves. But he draws the wrong conclusion. We should rather conclude that the causal control principle is false. We are responsible (if we are) because what we believe is at least in large part fixed by how things are. We could not be responsible if what we believed was just up to us, if we could whimsically decide for ourselves which beliefs would take root in our minds.

Nor would we be responsible if we could freely choose which convictions to adopt or preferences to embrace. We would then have no ground for any choice we made. If we supplied a reason for our choice, that would simply raise a further question of justification—why did we choose that particular desire or that particular conviction?—and so backward into infinity. We must just have ultimate convictions and tastes that we cannot abandon by fiat, to be capable of rational action. Once again the causal control principle ends not by defining, but by undermining, the conditions of responsibility.

Psychological and Metaphysical Impossibility

Suppose determinism is false. People’s decisions are for the most part causally downstream of original acts of their will. The causal control principle holds that they are therefore responsible for what they do. But the familiar phenomenon of psychological impossibility remains. Martin Luther speaks psychological truth when he declares that he can do no other than declare his new faith before the world; Mother Teresa is incapable of a selfish thought or action; Stalin is incapable of a generous or noble one. Commentators sometimes say that people have put themselves in that situation by prior deliberate decisions. Mother Teresa may have squashed any selfish thought she had until she no longer had any. But that is not necessarily (or, I think, even usually) so. Someone who was born into and grew up in a rigid military environment may never have been capable of shirking disagreeable or dangerous duty; someone born into a fundamentalist religious family or into a resentful and mistreated minority may never have been capable of acts that seem natural to free will and others. We say that these people’s character makes it psychologically impossible for them to act, in certain instances, other than as they do.

If we are tempted by the causal principle, we must decide whether this kind of psychological impossibility negates judgmental responsibility so that though we may blame ordinary political leaders for their infrequent acts of cruelty or tyranny, it would be wrong to blame anyone so double-dyed in evil as Stalin, and though it would be right to praise generally selfish people for their occasional acts of generosity, it would be wrong ever to praise someone so instinctively good as Mother Teresa. This seems implausible.⑳ But if we therefore decide that psychological impossibility does not count, so that we can praise or condemn Stalin and Mother Teresa as we do everyone else, then the causal principle seems arbitrary in a different way. We must be distinguishing between psychological and some other kind of inevitability—call it metaphysical. We must think that someone’s will can be the uncaused cause of his actions in spite of the fact that his character, formed by events wholly beyond his control, makes it impossible for him to act other than as he does. But that only offers another puzzle. If inevitability is what defeats the ethically important kind of control, then the source of the inevitability shouldn’t matter. If inevitability does not in itself defeat the ethically and morally important kind of control, then why would metaphysical inevitability defeat it?

The Responsibility System

The causal control principle has what might appear to be roots within the popular responsibility system I described. We are not responsible when someone pushes us or manipulates our mind through hypnosis or chemical or electrical intervention. That is understandable; these are not our acts. But we are also not responsible when we are small children or seriously mentally ill. It might seem an important strength of the causal principle that it identifies and justifies all these exceptions. Indeed, the familiar pessimistic argument that I described at the outset begins with that claim. Pessimistic incompatibilists argue that if we accept that mentally ill criminals should be excused because they are not responsible, we must for that reason accept that no one is ever responsible, because everyone is actually in the same position. People who are mentally ill are not in control of their behavior, but neither are people whose actions are caused entirely by events and laws beyond their control.

The structure of that familiar argument is important. It is addressed to people who think that they and other people are normally judgmentally responsible for what they do, but who also assume that children and the mentally ill, among others, are not. It aims to show such people that they already accept the causal control principle. “You assume,” it tells them, “that there are crucial differences between your normal situation and that of children and the mentally ill. The causal control principle captures what you must take the crucial difference to be. You must think that in these exceptional cases people’s decisions are caused by events they could not control, while in the normal cases people’s acts of will initiate the causal chain that ends in action. We now show you, by demonstrating the truth of determinism, that your own decisions are never original in that way but are always the product of events wholly beyond your control.” The strategy assumes that the distinction ordinary people see between normal and exceptional cases is best explained as a difference in causal paths: they think that decisions in the exceptional cases, but not in normal cases, are causally determined by past events over which the agent had no control.

But that cannot be what ordinary people think. They do assume that they are responsible for their decisions and that young children and the mentally ill are not. But the causal control principle cannot be, for them, what justifies that distinction. Consider first young children. Senior citizens make decisions that give effect to their beliefs, desires, and preferences. We have no reason to think that young children, who certainly make decisions, make them in any other way. We therefore have no basis for ascribing a different internal agency or cause of decision to them. Whatever view we take about the freedom of an adult will must therefore hold for a young child as well. But of course there is a difference: it is the difference that the rival interpretation of the responsibility system, the capacity control principle, picks out. Young children have a defective capacity, judged by normal adult standards, to form correct beliefs about what the world is like and about the consequence, prudence, and morality of their doing and having what they want. They are often ignorant of “the nature and quality” of their acts. It is these incapacities, not any assumption about the causal pedigree of their decisions, that strikes people as requiring that children be relieved of some or all judgmental responsibility.

Now consider someone suffering from a serious mental disease: he thinks himself Napoleon or God, and he also thinks that this identity entitles or even requires him to kill or steal. He lacks the normal capacity to form beliefs that are guided by facts and logic. He is crazy, and the familiar responsibility system holds him exempt from judgmental responsibility for that reason. But there is no reason to suppose that his decisions have either less or more initiating power than they would have had if he were not crazy. Like normal people, he acts in a way that is fully predictable, given a full knowledge of his beliefs and normative personality. True, we find it natural to say that his disease has made him kill, which might suggest something special about the pedigree of his decisions. But that is only a figure of speech. Taken literally it is absurd. We speak more accurately when we say that the disease has distorted its victim’s judgment. But then, once again, we are invoking the capacity, not the causal, principle to justify the exception.

Now consider a different form of mental disease: someone who though he has normal powers to form true beliefs, and though he is committed to unexceptional moral, ethical, and prudential convictions, nevertheless constantly makes fateful decisions that contradict all those convictions. Instances range from psychopaths—the killer who begs society to catch him before he kills again—to the physiological or psychological addict, the smoker or shooter or alcoholic or compulsive hand-washer who is desperate to stop but cannot. I distinguish these unfortunates from people who have been hypnotized into behavior they would reject or whose minds are manipulated by a villain with a thought-control ray gun. I do not know what it feels like to be hypnotized, and no one knows what it feels like to have his impulses zapped into being. I shall assume, however, that people in those latter cases do not make what I called final decisions: real, felt decisions that merge into the actions the decisions contemplate. Their behavior is like a cough or other production of their autonomic nervous system. They do not act, and so their behavior raises no question of judgmental responsibility. (If I am wrong, then their cases raise the same problem as those of the ill people I discuss.) I do suppose, however, that psychopaths and addicts make final decisions: to kill or to light or shoot up. Would it make sense for ordinary people, who take themselves to be responsible for their acts, to excuse psychopaths or addicts because of some perceived difference in the causal genesis of their own and their decisions?

We ordinary people, who believe that we are responsible for what we do but that psychopaths and addicts are not, concede that we ourselves are sometimes unable to overcome temptations of various sorts: we sometimes decide to do what our reflective values condemn as imprudent or wrong. We might or might not deliberate much; we might or might not struggle. But temptation wins. We say, “Just this once” or “The hell with it,” and we light up or order steak and fries. We do not think that on these occasions we have been hypnotized or zapped; we do not think our wills have been robbed of their ordinary originating power. We think, on the contrary, that the state of our wills is to blame: we say we have been weak-willed, and we resolve not to sin again. We count the occasion as showing, not a conquest of our minds by some alien force, but a failure of our mind’s ordinary capacity to organize and direct our reflective convictions.

We can find no reason, in this account of our own lapses, to think that an addict’s situation is an entirely different matter rather than only different in degree. We have no reason to suppose that some alien force has usurped the role of the addict’s will, either. We may say that because he yields even though he knows that the result will be disastrous, he is very much weaker than we are. He is in fact incapable of controlling his immediate impulses; perhaps, in the moment of acting, he is even incapable of understanding his peril. But then we are not assuming that the causal path of mental events distinguishes his case from ours. We count the difference between us and him as one of capability and therefore of degree. That latter explanation does not invoke the causal control principle; it makes no assumption, either way, about determinism or epiphenomenalism.

Summary: Causal Control?

I must first make clear what my argument is not. I started this discussion by noticing that pessimistic incompatibilism would require us to abandon practically the entire body of our ethical and moral convictions and practice; so much that we could not, I said, actually believe it. It might therefore be tempting to say that no matter how strong the arguments are for the causal control principle, we must reject it just for that reason.㉑ That has not been my argument. I have rather tried to show that there are no arguments for the causal principle: nothing that we need to sweep under a carpet and try to forget.

The causal control principle is an ethical or moral principle, so any argument for it must be interpretive. It does not just follow from any scientific or metaphysical discovery: that is the lesson of Part One. It can find support only in other moral and ethical principles. But it is supported by none of them. It is contradicted by the principle that people are responsible when they attempt harm, even when the attempt is unsuccessful. We can find no moral or ethical explanation why, if some acts are caused by external circumstances and others are not, an agent should be responsible for the latter but not the former. Nor why it matters whether a final decision is uncaused by external forces when all the factors that make any decision rational—the beliefs and value on which it is based—are clearly caused by external forces. The principle is also contradicted by the practices that allow us to praise or blame people who are psychologically unable to act otherwise. Nor does the ordinary responsibility system we identified presuppose, as many philosophers suppose it does, the causal principle. On the contrary, that principle cannot explain the cardinal features of that system. So we do not reject causal control because, though the best arguments support it, we can’t believe it. We reject it because no argument supports it. As I said, a great many philosophers, including some very distinguished ones, nevertheless do accept it. They report a “robust intuition” that we cannot be responsible for an action unless we are the first cause of that action. But that claim presupposes rather than argues for the control principle; it offers nothing else by way of a link between ethics and science. Intuitions are not arguments.

It does not follow that the second principle I distinguished, the capacity control principle, is automatically preferable as an interpretation; perhaps we can make no good sense of that principle either. But the failure of the causal principle prepares us for a more sympathetic inspection of that alternative. Our original conviction that responsibility depends on control now seems itself at stake. Perhaps the capacity principle can make it more intelligible.

Capacity Control (241)

The Inescapable Importance of Decision

Can we do a better or worse job of making decisions even if, unknown to us, the decisions we make are inevitable? I believe we can. Another fantasy. The painter begins on a giant canvas. He dreams and imagines. He sketches, draws, paints, rubs out, paints over, despairs, smokes, drinks, returns, paints violently, stands back, sighs, lights up. He is done. His canvas is exhibited; we adore it and we celebrate him. Then a guru in the Arctic Circle calls a press conference. He unveils an exact replica of the great painting; newly sophisticated dating techniques prove that it was created a second before our artist began his own work. The guru explains that he has an instant painting machine directed by a powerful computer at whose disposal he has placed an exact description of every event since the beginning of time, including, of course, information about the artist’s various abilities, his convictions about greatness in art, and his beliefs about the tastes of rich collectors. We are amazed.

But do we value the artist’s efforts or achievement less? Before the press conference we valued what he did because we admired the way he made the many thousands of large and small decisions that ended in the wonderful picture. He made those decisions splendidly. None of that has changed; our amazing discovery cannot have cheapened the worth of a single brush stroke. They remain his decisions; he made them self-consciously with no guidance from any of the guru’s information. We praise the artist for those decisions. We are not praising some internal homunculus person—his “will”—who made him do it.

Of course, if we discovered that he had in some way cheated—employed some other artist and taken the credit—we would not have praised him. The decisions we praise would not then have been his.㉒ But predictability itself cannot cheapen achievement.㉓ That explains why Mother Teresa and Stalin were responsible for what they did. A sharp-eyed critic discovers a few square inches in the artist’s canvas that the replica did not replicate exactly. The guru interrogates his machines and checks his base of information. No mistake was made. The artist has free will after all! We do not suddenly value his achievement more, however. Perhaps he would have painted better if he had done exactly what the machines predicted.

We find, in this fantasy, the same account of the performance value of a work of art as we identified in Chapter 9. This lies in an artist’s own creative decisions and not in any more remote causal account of those decisions. Now we apply the same account, as we did there, to a more embracing creative career: your living your life and trying to live it well. The value you achieve in that larger career also depends on the character of your decisions, not their remote ancestry. It does not matter whether your decisions were fixed by the world’s history or initiated in some spontaneous festering of neural molecules. The remote natural etiology of your decisions is irrelevant to the performance value or disvalue these decisions create.

The struggle I described in Chapter 6, to create integrity among our convictions, is part of the unfolding drama of self-conscious life. If all our decisions are determined, then so are these. That does not make integrity less crucial to our ethical success. Is it an objection to this entire line of thought that it makes us judgmentally responsible for our character even though we did not choose our character? Strictly speaking, it makes us responsible for our decisions, not our character. But of course decisions flow from character. So, yes, we are responsible for our character. If this were not so—if we treated character as the good or bad luck someone has had—there would be no person left whose luck that could be. I cannot excuse my indolence, or you your impatience, because neither of us chose to have these qualities. But can we be responsible for what we have not chosen? Yes. The causal control principle denies that we can, but it is mistaken. Handicaps and accidents are different precisely because they do not reflect character. As we shall see in Chapter 16, that difference matters to distributive justice.

An Ethical Justification for Exemption

These are the assumptions—about character, decision, and performance value in living—that we need in order to explain why we have judgmental responsibility for our decisions generally. Now we confront a different question. Why do we not have responsibility for all our decisions? What justifies the exceptions our responsibility system recognizes? I argued that, contrary to first impressions, the causal control principle cannot justify these exceptions. We must now ask whether the alternative understanding of control, the capacity principle, provides a better justification.

I cannot deny, as I write a paragraph or end a love affair, that I must count my act in any overall self-assessment. But we do exempt certain decisions from counting, when we think we have good reason to do this. We can do this for other people as they act and for ourselves in retrospect. Which decisions, if any, should we exclude? What screening filters would be justified? We cannot screen out decisions just because we regret them; that would altogether erase the possibility of living well. But we do have reason to adopt a much less forgiving filter. Often in various contexts we distinguish between doing a job badly and not being able to do it at all. A blind person does not read badly. We must see the responsibility system in that light. The capacity principle describes capabilities we believe someone must have if he is sensibly to be judged successful or unsuccessful in his effort to live well.

Bernard Williams pointed out that a screening filter can be constructed in various ways; the combination reflected in Greek literature was, he believed, very like our own, but in certain important ways different.㉔ We treat even temporary insanity as negating responsibility, but Sophocles’ Ajax thought himself responsible for his stupid slaughtering of cattle, even though Athena made him do it by making him mad.㉕ The capacity principle holds, instead, that someone lacks control in the pertinent sense when he has insufficient capacity to form true and pertinent beliefs about the world in which he acts, or to match his decisions to his normative personality. That principle therefore provides a different screening filter. We must judge whether it is a better one by asking whether it reflects a better conception of adverbial ethical value.

People have these two capacities to very different degrees. Almost any scientist is better at forming true beliefs about the physical world than I am, and someone who is less impulsive is better at conforming his decisions to what he actually thinks good for him to have or do. The capacity principle supposes a threshold level of these capacities, and much of the argument among lawyers and laymen about when it is proper to hold someone responsible for his behavior is actually argument about where that threshold should be set. It is a virtue of the capacity principle that it shows these disputes to be ethical rather than psychological in character. They turn on micro value judgments that people who accept the capacity principle in the abstract will make differently.

In some cases, however, failure in one of the other of the capacities is egregious and undeniable, and we should concentrate first on those cases. An idiot cannot form a large enough stock of stable true beliefs about the world to make his life safe, let alone profitable; he lacks the minimum level of the first capacity.㉖ Someone with serious frontal lobe brain injury may be wholly unable to avoid aggressive and violent behavior, even though nothing he thinks or wants or approves recommends that behavior. The capacity principle holds that the idiot and the victim of serious brain damage are not judgmentally responsible for the decisions that manifest these incapacities. The principle does not deny that an agent’s other incapacities, properties, or situation may also be grounds of exemption. (I consider some candidate examples toward the end of this chapter.) But we concentrate now on those incapacities that the capacity principle recognizes.

How can we justify these incapacity exceptions? They assume a more basic ethical conviction: that living well means creating not just a chronology but a narrative that weaves together values of character—loyalties, ambitions, desires, tastes, and ideals. No one creates a narrative of perfect integrity: we all act, as we say, out of character sometimes. Many people’s lives, judged as narratives, are picaresque or even a shambles—Hubbard’s “one damned thing after another” or Millay’s “one damn thing again and again.”㉗ But just for that reason those lives are not lived well, no matter how full of worldly success they turn out to be, unless they are redeemed by a new, late-in-life integrating interpretation or by conversion to a new integrity. Our responsibility system reflects that—at least to me—attractive ethical judgment.

In this light, the first capacity seems indispensable. Creating a life requires reacting to the environment in which that life is lived; a person cannot sensibly be treated, or in retrospect treat himself, as creating a life unless he can form beliefs about the world that are largely responsive to how the world is. People whose senses are impaired in some way, or who have had an unsatisfactory education, may be able to compensate enough to form mainly correct beliefs about their immediate environment. But an idiot or someone who thinks he is Napoleon or that pigs can fly lacks that minimal ability. Philosophers sometimes ask you to imagine that you are only a disembodied brain in a nutrient vat, comprehensively deceived by a master intelligence into thinking that you are an embodied bipedal organism living on a planet Earth. If that were true, then you would not be leading a life. Assuming that we are not brains in a vat, almost all of us have the epistemic capacity we need for most of our lives. But from time to time some of us lack or lose that normal ability in one way or another, and then our judgmental responsibility for what we do is called into question.

The second capacity is regulative; it seems essential as well. If I am to respond to the challenge of living well, I must have the capacity to match my decisions to a sense of what living well would mean. My personality has been molded by forces gathered in my personal history; these have shaped my personality, but they do not limit my ability to match my decisions to the personality they have shaped. It destroys that capacity, however, when others take over my decision-making capacity to serve their own ends: when I am hypnotized or governed through electrodes implanted in my brain. That usurpation disconnects my decision from my personality, so that it is at best an accident when these match. It is therefore sensible that when I ask how well I have lived, I distinguish between what I did when I had the capacity to reflect my own desires and convictions in my decisions and what I did when I lacked that capacity. I take responsibility only for the former. Some people are in that position temporarily or even over extended periods of their lives, not because others have stolen their capacity to shape their behavior to their own personality, but because they lack the capacity in themselves. A beginning infant does not make decisions at all, I suppose. A very young child does, but he does not have the cognitive or critical ability needed to match his decisions to any self-consciously recognized ambitions or desires. The victims of severe mental disease I described earlier—the killers who beg to be caught—are in the same case. Indeed, mental illness may savage either or both of these judgmental capacities; serious loss of either might be a defining condition of mental disease.㉘ The history of the insanity-defense debate that I describe briefly later in this chapter shows a pendulum swing between a strict doctrine that requires loss of epistemic capacity and a more generous doctrine that also makes regulative capacity critical.

The Moral Application

We have now constructed an ethical justification of the capacity principle. The principle functions as a moral as well as an ethical principle, however. In that different role it plays no direct part in anyone’s judgment of how well he or anyone else has led his life; instead it serves, among other purposes, as a threshold condition for blame and sanction. We must therefore ask what justification we have for exporting the principle from the ethical to the moral arena in that way. It is a central demand of self-respect, I argued in Chapter 9, that we must not only take personal responsibility for making something of our own lives but also treat the principle that requires this as an objective principle of value. In the next chapter I argue that this means recognizing and respecting the same responsibility in others. That requirement cannot be met—we cannot be treating the principle of personal responsibility as having objective standing—unless we understand personal responsibility to have the same character and dimension for everyone. So we must give that principle the same character and force in morality that it has in ethics.

I rely on the capacity principle in criticizing myself; in deciding whether it is appropriate to feel shame or guilt or only deep regret for some decision I wish I had not taken. I hold myself responsible unless I am satisfied that I lacked some capacity essential to responsibility when I took that decision. What justification can I have for using a different—stricter or more lenient—standard for judging the guilt of someone else? Using a different standard would mean judging him as I refuse to judge myself. It would be an act of disrespect to him.

We have already met a dramatic form of that failure. Some criminologists say that because science has shown that no one has free will, it is wrong to punish anyone for anything. We should treat those we now style criminals medically rather than as criminals, hoping to reprogram rather than punish them. This declaration supposes that “we” have responsibility that other people lack, that we can judge ourselves to act wrongly while we can only judge everyone else to act dangerously or inconveniently. Most people have a strong negative reaction to the proposal that outlaws should be treated medically rather than punished criminally. They think that this would dehumanize outlaws. They sense, I believe, that this proposal fails the cardinal requirement that we treat responsibility in others as we treat it in ourselves.

Illusion?

I have neglected epiphenomenalism for several pages. Of course, in judging the merits or demerits of our final decisions, we and others pay great attention to the consequences that we foresee, or ought to foresee, of acting as we decide to act. But, strictly speaking, that attention presupposes no causal efficacy. It presupposes only what logicians call material implication. If I decide to pull the trigger, someone will die without the intervention of any other agent; if I do not, he will not. I can know the truth of such conditionals from my experience, without making any assumption about the causal force of my decision on the muscles that pull my trigger finger back. The conditionals are consistent with epiphenomenalism as well as determinism. They are also consistent, of course, with denying both.

The capacity principle makes exceptions for what it treats as pathological cases: it conditions judgmental responsibility on the capacities of the agent. But these are not causal conditions. The principle makes capacities crucial to responsibility, not because normal people have wills that are in charge while a child or an idiot or a madman does not, but because it sets conditions on responsibility with an eye to the overall ethical responsibility to live well. It declares that assignment in play only when a person is capable of pursuing the assignment. A toddler or idiot or madman makes decisions, and makes them, perhaps, with some sense of responsibility for them. But he should reject judgmental responsibility for those decisions later, when he grows or if he recovers, and the rest of us should reject them now. We think—and the toddler, at least, will later come to think—that it would be right not to count those decisions in deciding how well he has lived. If we accept the capacity principle as the ethical basis for our responsibility system, we can await the latest discoveries about the electrodynamics of our brains with boundless curiosity but no terror.

There is no delusion in this story. Nothing in my description of the role the capacity principle plays in fixing or denying responsibility makes any ultimate causal assumptions at all. No doubt many people who accept the responsibility system do believe that determinism and epiphenomenalism are both wrong: in fact, absurd. They believe that it has not already been decided what they will think best to do; that this is a matter of their spontaneous manufacture here and now. But whether that further thought is coherent or not, it plays no part in our story. We are not like the brains floating in a vat. They live in complete ignorance of their situation; they have no way to discover it. They wholly lack the capacity to form beliefs based on evidence. Most of us have that capacity in ample degree; indeed, we are now supposing that we have the capacity even to discover that all our decisions are determined by ancient events. We are not in either complete or terminal ignorance.

One more challenge. It might be said that if determinism or epiphenomenalism is true, people never have the capacities the capacity control principle assumes they normally do have, because these capacities require some kind of ultimate causal originality or power. But they require no such thing. The first is the capacity to form true beliefs about the physical world and the mental states of other people. It does not impeach that capacity that our beliefs about the world are caused by events beyond our control; on the contrary, as I said, it is exactly that fact that endows us with that capacity. Nor can it damage that capacity that our final decisions do not enter into causal relations with our nerves and muscles; that fact, if it is a fact, is completely irrelevant to the existence of the first capacity. The second, regulative capacity the principle assumes is that people can normally make final decisions that can be understood as serving their desires and convictions in the light of their beliefs. That is an assumption about the character—not the etiology or causal consequence—of final decisions. People have that capacity whether or not they were fated to have it. A fast car, whose behavior is certainly determined by events beyond its control, nevertheless has the capacity to exceed the speed limit.

Responsibility in Practice (248)

The Insanity Defense

The choice between the causal and the capacity control principles is important for reasons that go beyond the free-will controversy. The choice is decisive for both explaining and debating the much more practical controversies I mentioned among people who accept the general structure of the responsibility system but disagree about its application to particular cases. If we think that people are responsible only when their actions flow from a spontaneous, uncaused act of will, then we will think that these practical controversies turn on an all-or-nothing psychobiological fact. When someone claims that he committed his criminal act in a blind rage or when overcome by an irresistible impulse or under duress or because he grew up in a ghetto or because he had watched too much violence on television, we would ask: were these forces or influences strong enough in the circumstances so that they displaced his will’s normal causal role, like a drunken sailor pushing the helmsman aside and taking the wheel? So that it was not his will but rather an overwhelming surge of sexual jealousy or some such force that provided the efficient cause of his muscles contracting around the trigger? I doubt that many of the citizens, lawyers, and judges who would have to answer those questions, if they accepted the causal principle, would understand them. Perhaps the popularity of the causal principle among philosophers has contributed to the confusion that marks this area of the criminal law.

If we reject the causal in favor of the capacity control principle, however, we pose a different question. Did the accused lack one or the other of the pertinent capacities to such a degree that it is inappropriate to ascribe responsibility to him? That question calls for two distinct judgments: an interpretive judgment about his behavior and an ethical and moral judgment that reasonable people make differently. It is therefore often a difficult question but not, I think, a mysterious one. People who must try to answer it—jurors after hearing volumes of testimony, perhaps—will have different opinions about the interpretive issue. They will disagree, for instance, about whether the defendant’s general behavior revealed an admiration for violence as part of his self-image, so that his violent act confirmed rather than contradicted his general capacity to suit his decision to his tastes. They will also disagree about the more evidently normative issue—about what level of incapacity is sufficient to let someone off the responsibility hook. We admire people who at least begin to answer that question introspectively. Would I think myself responsible, in retrospect, if I was in the defendant’s shoes? That is the spirit of the attractive thought, “There but for the grace of God go I.”

The history of the insanity defense suggests that many people do not approach the issue in that introspective way, however. Outrage is a more frequent spur. When the public has been particularly anxious for vengeance after some crime, judges and legislators have responded by cutting back the scope of the insanity defense. The M’Naghten Rule, named after the woodcutter who killed Peel’s secretary while trying to kill the prime minister himself, shrunk the defense to allow only the first, cognitive, capacity to count, and stipulated that only a particularly low level of even that capacity could excuse. Over many decades most American states moved from that strict rule to a more forgiving one that permitted the accused to argue that he was confronted with an irresistible impulse. But asking juries to judge the appropriate level of the second, regulative capacity proved unwieldy, and the results often seemed too permissive to many scholars as well as to the general public. The argument, made to a Florida court, that the defendant lacked the necessary regulative capacity because he had watched too much television, seemed a reductio ad absurdam that called the standard itself into question.㉙ It was, however, the attempted assassination of President Reagan that provoked the greatest complaints about the leniency of the insanity defense.

In any case, for whatever reason, many American states have now adopted a different approach based on a recommendation of the American Law Institute: the defense is available to a defendant only “if at the time of such conduct as a result of mental disease or defect he lacks substantial capacity either to appreciate the criminality of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of the law.”㉚ That rule by no means eliminates the need for judgment, and different lawyers, judges, and jurors make the judgment differently. But the rule does change the focus from discrete event to general capacity. This has evidentiary advantages: it is easier to judge whether a defendant has shown a general incapacity, manifested in other ways, rather than just a single-shot temporary incapacity exhausted in the crime it is alleged to excuse. Requiring a showing of mental disease or defect also reduces the vagueness of the defense: the label “disease,” even if not a medical term of art, is itself a classification. We do not regard someone as suffering from mental disease if his cognitive and regulative capacities fall only somewhat short of what we take to be normal. They must be very poor.

Duress, Injustice, and Responsibility

When we recognize the crucial connection between our ethical responsibility to live well and our judgmental responsibility for discrete decisions, we can more adequately understand and argue about other controversial features of the responsibility system. It is controversial, for example, whether and when duress diminishes responsibility. Usually when someone obeys an order to kill because he is threatened with death himself, he does not lack either of the pertinent capacities. He obeys because he understands his situation accurately and because he is able to conform his decision to his reflective judgment of what is best for him. His responsibility is not diminished, though his situation may nevertheless provide an excuse. Torture, at least in extreme forms, is different. Someone who threatens torture hopes to change his victim’s options just as someone does who threatens death. Someone facing torture retains both the capacities necessary for responsibility in his choice whether to obey to avoid it. But when the torture begins, the torturer’s aim is different: he hopes to reduce his victim to a screaming animal who is no longer able to reason in that way. He aims to extinguish, not to invoke, his victim’s responsibility. But if duress short of torture diminishes responsibility, this must normally be for some other reason.㉛

It is also controversial whether someone born into a ghetto of poverty is less responsible for any antisocial behavior than people from more privileged backgrounds. He does not suffer from any pertinent incapacity. Someone with a mental disease may lack the capacity to conform his behavior to the law, but that is not true of someone condemned to an impoverished inner-city life who decides to push drugs. He knows that what he does is illegal and has every opportunity to consider whether it is immoral as well; he is no less capable than others of forming accurate views about the world or of matching his decisions to his desires or convictions. Again, if we think him less responsible than others, as a great many people do think, we must find some other ground.

We cannot find that different ground so long as we take the causal principle to govern responsibility. However we understand the idea of a free will, we can make no sense of the hypothesis that either threats or poverty can displace its normal causal operation. But the picture of judgmental responsibility we have now drawn opens the way to a very different suggestion: we are tempted to find diminished responsibility in these circumstances because—but only when—duress or poverty is the product of injustice. Our foundational responsibility to live well provides a ground for claiming moral and political rights. (I discuss some of these rights in Chapters 17.) We might—or might not—think that these rights should be protected by a further, distinct, responsibility filter in addition to the capacity filters we have been discussing. The authors of injustice cheat their victims of opportunities or resources that would very likely have led to different decisions.㉜ Perhaps we should therefore not count these corrupted decisions in assessing how blameworthy we or others are. Or at least we should not count them fully: we should discount their responsibility in view of the injustice. This distinct, further filter is conceptually available because the root questions for the responsibility system are not metaphysical but ethical and moral; this further filter is controversial for exactly that reason.

It is important that this last argument for diminished responsibility is grounded in justice, not capacity. People who live in ghettos of poverty in a nation of affluence have been cheated of opportunities and resources they are entitled to have. But people who live in an age or space of relative privation that is no one’s fault cannot claim diminished responsibility for that reason; otherwise no one would be judgmentally responsible for anything until some millennium of wealth and cultural sophistication had been reached. The poverty that even arguably mitigates judgmental responsibility is only unjust poverty. That is why those who deny the injustice deny the mitigation as well.

===============================================================================
p.459

➀ I believe this is much the same understanding of decision as Thomas Nagel offers of action, though I’m not sure that spiders make decisions. See Nagel, The View from Nowhere (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986), 111.

➁ Certain now-famous experiments conceived by Benjamin Libet, an experimental psychologist, at least illustrate this hypothesis, though they hardly demonstrate that it is true. An experimental subject is asked spontaneously to raise whichever of his hands he wishes: scans indicate that the brain activity that ends in his raising one hand begins a small fraction of a second before the different brain activity begins that constitutes awareness of which hand he will raise. Libet concludes that the subject’s decision to raise his right hand is not the cause of his raising his right hand, but only another effect of whatever did make him raise his right hand. He is careful to point out that his results do not preclude the possibility that the subject may interrupt any behavior begun in advance of a decision by a fresh decision: I may initiate an act of shoplifting unaware but cancel it once I become aware that I am about to steal. That possibility, Libet believes, is enough to protect moral responsibility: I am responsible if I do not intervene to cancel some decisions I should have cancelled. Epiphenomenalists suppose, however, that all decisions, including decisions to cancel a process begun unconsciously, are side effects rather than causes. (Patrick Haggard, “Conscious Intention and Motor Control,” Trends in Cognitive Neuroscience 9, no. 6 [June 2005]: 290–96; Alfred Mele, Free Will and Luck [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006], chapter 2.)

➂ For a sample, see Gary Watson, ed., Free Will (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003); Robert Kane, ed., The Oxford Handbook of Free Will (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005).

➃ Thomas Nagel has insisted throughout his career on a distinction between two sources of truth about ourselves and our place in the world: a subjective, personal perspective and an objective, impersonal one from which we try to understand ourselves as part of the natural world. He believes that the free will problem arises, and is insoluble, because we cannot help finding inconsistent ideas true when we turn from one perspective to the other. We cannot escape a conviction of freedom in the personal perspective that disappears in the objective one.

  The objective view seems to wipe out such autonomy because it admits only one kind of explanation of why something happened—causal explanation—and equates its absence with the absence of any explanation at all … [T]he basic idea which it finds congenial is that the explanation of an occurrence must show how that occurrence, or a range of possibilities within which it falls, was necessitated by prior conditions and events. (The View from Nowhere, 115)
  
For reasons set out in this chapter, I think that the impersonal perspective Nagel has in mind is not appropriate to considering ethical and moral questions about responsibility (as distinct from scientific or metaphysical questions about freedom) unless that perspective is made pertinent by some independent moral or ethical principle such as the “causal control” principle I consider and reject later in this chapter. I agree, of course, that that perspective is mandatory to some issues: when we consider the nature of the external world as it is apart from the way any particular creature perceives it. However, Nagel offers a general reason for thinking the impersonal perspective always pertinent to any question about ourselves, including the question of responsibility. Taking up that perspective, he says, “reflect[s] our own disposition to view ourselves, and our need to accept ourselves, from outside. Without such acceptance we will be in a significant way alienated from our lives” (The View from Nowhere, 198). That seems to me to put the questions in the wrong order. Whether we alienate ourselves from our lives when we suppose that our responsibility for some action does not turn on any causal explanation of that action depends on whether that is a plausible view of the basis of responsibility.

In an equally influential study, Peter Strawson denied that the objective standpoint is right for considering issues of judgmental responsibility (Strawson, “Freedom and Resentment,” in Freedom and Resentment and Other Essays [London: Methuen, 1974]). Strawson argued that attributions of responsibility are central to a network of human emotions and reactions of blame, resentment, and guilt that we could not abandon without ceasing to be the kinds of creature we are. He declared, in a passage Nagel sets out in his own discussion:

  Inside the general structure or web of human attitudes and feelings of which I have been speaking, there is endless room for modification, redirection, criticism and justification. But questions of justification are internal to it. The existence of the general framework of attitudes itself is something we are given with the fact of human society. As a whole, it neither calls for, nor permits, an external “rational justification.” (“Freedom and Resentment,” 23)
  
Strawson treats the problem of responsibility as arising within a narrative of motives and reactions and holds that we have no reason to test that system by asking whether its assumptions are verified by causal explanations situated in the natural world. Nagel thinks this a mistake

  because there is no way of preventing the slide from internal to external criticism once we are capable of an external view. The problem of free will … arises because there is a continuity between familiar “internal” criticism of the reactive attitudes on the basis of specific facts, and philosophical criticisms on the basis of supposed general facts. (The View from Nowhere, 125)
  
Nagel here states an important, and I believe popular, argument in favor of the causal control principle I later discuss and for taking up the impersonal perspective that principle requires. Our ordinary judgments make exceptions to the general principle that we are responsible for what we do; in Nagel’s view these exceptions can be justified only by assuming something like that principle. I think this popular argument wrong, however. In the text I argue that, on the contrary, the causal control principle is inadequate to justify the exceptions Nagel has in mind, and that these exceptions can in fact be justified only through a different principle that does not make responsibility an impersonal causal issue. So in my view Nagel’s argument for rejecting Strawson’s internal perspective actually tells in Strawson’s favor. I should add, however, that I find Strawson’s own argument—that we could not possibly abandon our sense of judgmental responsibility—an inadequate basis for declaring our ordinary judgments of responsibility philosophically respectable. We need a defense of our ordinary judgments, not just a confession of our inability to doubt them. We need to show that we have no reason to doubt them. That is one aim of this chapter.

➄ Nagel, The View from Nowhere, 114–15.

➅ See Galen Strawson, “The Impossibility of Mental Responsibility,” Philosophical Studies 75 (1994): 5–24.

➆ True, we commonly separate blameworthiness from wrongness: we think that someone who murders has done something wrong even if he was insane at the time and is therefore not to blame. Incompatibilists assume that that distinction would still hold if determinism were true: though it would then follow that no one was ever blameworthy, it would not follow that nothing was ever the wrong thing to do. But that depends on why we think certain acts wrong. On any plausible theory, concepts of responsibility figure just as pervasively in identifying wrongful acts as in adjudicating blame for those acts. Yes, some philosophers, including some utilitarians, believe that an act is wrong if it has bad consequences, whatever the mental state of the agent. Someone who gives to charity acts wrongly if, unknown and unknowable to him, he would have improved overall happiness by spending on his own pleasure instead. This is not plausible. Someone does wrong when he harms someone else deliberately or negligently, without justification, but not when his acts cause the same suffering wholly unintentionally and unforeseeably. Then he is not only not to blame but has done nothing wrong. That discrimination is built into the definition of discrete moral rules: we cannot commit murder or steal or embezzle or lie or betray our friends inadvertently. You do not break your promise to help me in need if there is no way you can know that I am in need. These discriminations are justified by assumptions about judgmental responsibility: knowledge or negligence matter for wrongness because they matter for responsibility. It would not be a mistake, therefore, to say that an idiot, who cannot understand that guns kill, does not act wrongly when he fires. We usually put the point differently: we say that he does act wrongly though he has an excuse. That makes it easier to explain why he is dangerous and must be restrained. It also poses no risk to the clarity of society’s prohibition of murder. Any attempt to qualify the prohibition with nuanced judgments of responsibility might erode its value. But that different way of describing his situation is available only because he acts in circumstances in which normal people would be responsible for murder. An idiot would not do the wrong thing shooting a stage gun in a play if even a normal person would have no reason to think the gun was loaded. Our identification of right and wrong is therefore parasitic on judgments of responsibility and culpability. If we really came to think that there was no difference between the responsibility of someone who secretly loaded the stage gun and someone who fired it unawares, we would have no reason to think the first of these acts morally wrong and the second not.

What about character? Having a bad character is different from posing a threat; someone with chicken pox poses a threat but need not have a bad character. On views I find plausible the distinction, once again, trades in concepts of responsibility. Someone has a bad character if he is prone to act badly—to do what it is wrong to do. If there is nothing that it is wrong to do, then no one has a bad character. Some people—those who are prone to kill as well as those with chicken pox—are dangerous because they are likely to cause harm. But that is the most we can say. What about liability responsibility? If I am not to blame for an act that caused someone else damage, if I did nothing wrong in acting that way, then why should I bear his cost?

What about prudence? I would think myself imprudent if I was hit by lightning taking my small boat out in an expected storm, but not if I was struck in a wholly unexpected and unpredictable one. But if determinism erases all grounds of selfblame in the former case, because it was predetermined that I would act in that way, then what ground is left for declaring myself imprudent? I can think I have a reason for acting in one way rather than another only when I take that alleged reason to affect how I should behave. If determinism means that there is no way I should behave because nature or fate has already determined how I will behave, then its annihilating power is catholic across reasons. If determinism rules out having reasons of some particular kind—reasons to criticize myself if I act in one way rather than another—then it rules out the very idea of having reasons to act in one way rather than another. Hurricanes are not blameworthy when they kill. Nor do they violate moral norms or display morally bad character. Nor are they imprudent when they swerve into cold air and dissipate. If determinism is true and means that we have no judgmental responsibility, then we are all—hurricanes and people—just large and small disturbances on nature’s sea.

Could we at least save judgments about good and bad states of affairs? Can’t we say that it is good when people are happier, even if no one ever has judgment responsibility for bringing that state of affairs about? That must depend, again, on your theory of why states of affairs are good or bad. It is good when great cathedrals are built and when people establish lives full of pleasure and achievement in their own or others’ eyes. If robots could be made happy, however, I would see no value in their happiness, though much value in the science that made them happy. If people lack judgmental responsibility, there might be no more value in their own happiness than in robotic happiness.

➇ The great defense lawyer Clarence Darrow was a pessimistic incompatibilist who therefore thought punishment wrong. He told the judge trying Richard Loeb and Nathan Leopold, students of Nietzsche, for the thrill murder of young Bobby Franks, “Nature is strong and she is pitiless. She works in her own mysterious way, and we are her victims. We have not much to do with it ourselves. Nature takes this job in hand, and we play our parts. In the words of old Omar Khayyam, we are only ‘Impotent pieces in the game He plays/Upon this checkerboard of nights and days, /Hither and thither moves, and checks, and slays,/And one by one back in the closet lays.’ What had this boy to do with it? He was not his own father; he was not his own mother; he was not his own grandparents. All of this was handed to him. He did not surround himself with governesses and wealth. He did not make himself. And yet he is to be compelled to pay.” See Douglas O. Linder, “Who Is Clarence Darrow?” www.law.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/DARESY.htm (1997).

➈ David Dolinko suggested that example.

➉ Robert Kane, who has written about free will for many years and edited several collections of essays on the free will issue, says that he agrees with 90 percent of my views on that subject and that he rejects, as I do, the causal principle (Kane, “Responsibility and Free Will in Dworkin’s Justice for Hedgehogs,” in Symposium: Justice for Hedgehogs: A Conference on Ronald Dworkin’s Forthcoming Book [special issue], Boston University Law Review 90, no. 2 [April 2010] [hereafter BU]: 611). He thinks I overlook Aristotle’s view that even though people are often not in control— when drunk, for instance—they are responsible for what they do then because they were in control at the earlier time when they decided to drink in excess. But, Kane continues, if determinism is true, then people have never been in control, so that Aristotle’s ground for insisting on their responsibility does not hold. That conclusion follows from determinism, however, only if we do accept the causal principle that Kane says he rejects. The contrast shows, I believe, the almost intuitive assumption of many of the best writers on the subject that something like the causal control principle is correct, and that those who reject it, like Hume, have made an elementary mistake.

⑪ Bernard Williams, Shame and Necessity (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973).

⑫ See W. F. R. Hardie, “Aristotle and the Freewill Problem,” Philosophy 43, no. 165 (July 1968): 274–78; Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, ed. R. E. Flatman and D. Johnston (New York: W. W. Norton, 1997), 108; David Hume, An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, ed. P. H. Nidditch (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1978), 73; T. M. Scanlon, Moral Dimensions: Permissibility, Meaning, Blame (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2008).

⑬ Hume, Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, 73.

⑭ Roderick Chisholm, “Human Freedom and the Self,” in Watson, ed., Free Will (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1982); Peter Van Inwagen, An Essay on Free Will (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983).

⑮ “[I] ask the incompatibilist to explain more exactly what kind of freedom he believes that morally significant choice must have, and to explain how choices that were free in this sense could have a special licensing power. I do not myself see how these questions can be given satisfactory answers” (Scanlon, Moral Dimensions, 206). See also Scanlon’s comments on an earlier draft of this chapter. Scanlon, “Varieties of Responsibility,” BU: 603.

⑯ See, e.g., J. J. C. Smart, “Free Will, Praise and Blame,” Mind 70, no. 278 (1961): 291–306. See also Nagel, The View from Nowhere; Nagel, “Moral Luck” (1979), reprinted in his Mortal Questions (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991).

⑰ Jean-Paul Sartre, Existentialism Is a Humanism (1945 lecture) (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007).

⑱ He may not be technically guilty of an attempt in law because, assuming that epiphenomenalism is true, he achieved nothing beyond a mental act. But he is ethically and morally in the same position as the frustrated murderer.

⑲ See Galen Strawson, “Impossibility of Mental Responsibility,” 13.

⑳ Susan Wolf argues, in effect, that Mother Teresa is free and responsible because she does what is right for the right reasons but Stalin is not free or responsible because he does not (Susan Wolf, “Self-Interest and Interest in Selves,” Ethics 96 [1986]; Wolf, Freedom within Reason [New York: Oxford University Press, 1990]). I find her distinction unpersuasive, but in any case she is not arguing from anything like the causal control principle.

㉑ Peter Strawson, Freedom and Resentment.

㉒ But suppose the guru, instead of predicting and then reproducing the painting, actually made it. He transmitted radio signals that manipulated the artist’s cerebellum so that the artist’s arm moved as the guru dictated. We wouldn’t give the artist credit then, of course. Now suppose that the radio signals also made the artist think that the thousands of decisions he was making were his own decisions. He thought, as he painted, that he was making his own painting, not someone else’s. But he was wrong. Making artistic decisions yourself means bringing to bear your own sense of the various aesthetic values in play and your own skill in exhibiting those values in a concrete work. That is why the capacity control principle makes some level of the second, regulative, capacity essential to responsibility. And that is why someone else’s painting through you is different from your painting by yourself, even if your aesthetic values and skills were predestined to take exactly the form they do. Our artist is brainwashed, we are now assuming, into thinking that it is his own artistic genius that is now displayed on the canvas before him. I imagined that a hypnotized patient might be in that position. But when he learns that the canvas actually signals the artistic skills of someone else, and his own only by accident, if at all, he will abandon all pride—or shame—in what he has done. We can turn this screw through more twists of fantasy. We imagine that the guru didn’t radio discrete hand movements to the artist’s brain but rather implanted the more general tastes—a sense of the artistic possibilities of abstract expressionism, perhaps—to which the artist responded. Or—a more difficult case still—that the guru implanted the  concrete insight that this genre might be exploited brilliantly by swinging leaking paint cans over a prone canvas. We can in this way manufacture hard cases for any judgment about the artist’s responsibility. These fantasy cases are hard, however, because we imagine two decision-makers rather than one, and the facts make it unclear whose values and skills a particular decision should be understood as exhibiting. That complication is absent when it is nature, rather than an Arctic guru, that has shaped an artist’s skills, taste, and judgment.

㉓ Of course our lives would change in ways we cannot hope even to imagine if we each discovered techniques like the guru’s that allowed us to predict everyone else’s behavior with even a tiny fraction of his accuracy. We certainly cannot imagine predicting our own behavior in that way, which means we could not fully predict the behavior of those whose lives we affect. But the difficulty of imagining such a world does not challenge the assumption that judgmental responsibility would survive.

㉔ Williams, Shame and Necessity, 55.

㉕ Ibid., 72–72.

㉖ We must distinguish opportunity from capacity in cases in which someone’s mistaken view of the world leads to bad results. Someone who is normally good at forming beliefs about the world doesn’t realize that the white substance in the sugar bowl is arsenic. He is judgmentally responsible for spooning it into his guest’s coffee: it is appropriate to hold his act up to standards of proper conduct. Whether he is at fault depends on whether his mistake was reasonable in the circumstances, which in turn depends on whether he had a reasonable opportunity to discover the truth and  negligent in not taking that opportunity. The idiot’s case is different; it would be wrong to approach the question of his responsibility in that way. Instead we should say that he is not judgmentally responsible for his acts: it is a mistake to treat his behavior as subject to ethical or moral evaluation. I am grateful to a reader for the Harvard University Press for suggesting that I distinguish the ordinary-mistake kind of case.

㉗ See quotations from Elbert Hubbard and Edna St. Vincent Millay on
ThinkExist.com.

㉘ Anita Allen believes, rightly, that the discussions of mental disease in this chapter and elsewhere are unsophisticated (Allen, “Mental Disorders and the ‘System of Judgmental Responsibility,’ ” BU: 621). She thinks that a competent philosophical account of these pathologies has not been written. I had no intention to provide such an account but only to characterize mental disease sufficiently to rebut the assumption that our attitudes toward the judgmental responsibility of victims of such disease shows that we accept the causal control principle.

㉙ See Hugo Adam Bedau, “Rough Justice: The Limits of Novel Defenses,” Report (The Hastings Center) 8, no. 6 (December 1978): 8–11.

㉚ American Law Institute, “Model Penal Code” (proposed official draft) (Philadelphia: Executive Office, American Law Institute, 1962).

㉛ Not necessarily. Seana Shiffrin has pointed out, in discussion, that duress can sometimes destroy these capacities through intense fear.

㉜ Compare my discussion of justice as a parameter of the good life in Sovereign Virtue: The Theory and Practice of Equality (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000), chapter 6.

===============================================================================

Key concepts:

capacities essential to responsibility (226)
- to form true beliefs
- to match our decisions to our values

capacity control principle (228):
  - locates responsibility within the brackets of an ordinary life lived from a personal perspective
  - our conscious decisions are, in principle, crucially and independently important in their own right and that their importance is in no way contingent on any remote causal explanation
  - an agent is in control when he is conscious of facing and making a decision, when no one else is making that decision through and for him, and when he has the capacities to form true beliefs about the world and to match his decisions to his normative personality—his settled desires, ambitions, and convictions
  - capacity control is essential to responsibility
  we are responsible (if we are) because what we believe is at least in large part fixed by how things are
  The capacity principle describes capabilities we believe someone must have if he is sensibly to be judged successful or unsuccessful in his effort to live well (243)
  The capacity principle holds that someone lacks control in the pertinent sense when - he has insufficient capacity to form true and pertinent beliefs about the world in which he acts
  - to match his decisions to his normative personality (244)
  threshold (244)
  
causal control principle (228):
  - views the question of responsibility from outside an agent’s own ordinary sense of his situation
  - ties the ethical judgment of responsibility to the scientific judgment of causation
  - it makes judgmental responsibility turn on the ultimate, originating historical causes of decision
  - causal control is essential to responsibility
  two components: it denies responsibility if either determinism or epiphenomenalism is true
  the causal control principle separates mind from body (233)
  The fact that we cannot just choose what to believe or want makes the causal control principle ethically and morally otiose (235)
  someone who acts irrationally is not in control
  causal control over actual decisions cannot provide judgmental responsibility on its own

compatibilists believe that full judgmental responsibility is consistent with determinism, and incompatibilists that it is not (223)

decision (220)
- causal control: a human will can act spontaneously as an uncaused cause

determinism (220): every one of these decisions, reflective as well as unreflective, is fully determined by processes and events that precede it and lie outside the control of the decider; decisions determined by prior processes and events

epiphenomenalism (220): denies that decisions even figure in the causal chain that ends in movements of nerve and muscle; decision-making is an illusion; there are no decisions

epistemic capacity (245): the capacity to acquire knowledge about the world

incompatibilism (227): we cannot justify our ordinary convictions about judgmental responsibility except by making responsibility depend on the ultimate causes of an action

internal phenomenal perspective (233)

judgmental responsibility (221, 223): Someone has judgmental responsibility for an act if it is appropriate to appraise his act against critical standards of performance

regulative capacity (245): the capcity to match decisions to normative personality

narrative (244): a life with integrity achieved by weaving values of character

normative personality (226)

rationality (234)
- we make decisions on the basis of our beliefs and values
- beliefs and values are largely shaped by the world and culture and personal history

responsibility system:
- making the right decisions
- capacities to make decisions

1. you cannot choose without supposing that there is a better and a worse choice for you to make
2. deciding includes assuming judgmental responsibility; the connection is internal and independent of any premise about the causes of decision

Causal control: points observed:
- responsibility depends on the ultimate causes of an action
- there is no way to discover the causes
- causes, even if they exist, and decision-making are independent
  - causes are about science or metaphysics
  - decision-making is about ethics
  - even if causes determine the actual events, the decision-making process is still ethically relevant; judgmentally responsible
- if we are judgmentally responsible, then we must be responsible for choosing all our beliefs and values
- If I am rational, I choose as my beliefs and desires directly; in that sense my decision is caused by factors beyond my control, even if I have free will; this is self-contradictory: how am I supposed to choose rationally without any beliefs and values?
If the key to judgmental responsibility is causal control, then we are not responsible unless we can freely choose the beliefs and preferences that are the ingredients of our decisions, as well as the decisions themselves.
- what we believe is at least in large part fixed by how things are: scientific facts and truths; this is what enables us to make rational decisions

Capacity control: points observed:
- to create integrity among our convictions, is part of the unfolding drama of self-conscious life: self-consciousness embraces truths
- we are responsible for our character as well as our decisions: integrity again
- The capacity principle supposes a threshold level of these capacities
- ethical life presupposes a constant reacting to the environment
