11 From Dignity to Morality (255)

Self-Respect and Respect for Others

Universal or Special?

We hope, remember, to integrate ethics with morality, not simply by incorporating morality into ethics but by achieving a mutually supportive integration of the two in which our thoughts about living well help us to see what our moral responsibilities are: an integration that responds to the traditional philosopher’s challenge about what reason we have to be good. We start by considering the implications for morality of the first of our two principles of dignity—that you must treat the success of your own life as a matter of objective importance. In Chapter 1 I described Kant’s principle. This holds that a proper form of self-respect—the self-respect demanded by that first principle of dignity—entails a parallel respect for the lives of all human beings.

If you are to respect yourself, you must treat their lives, too, as having an objective importance. Many readers will find that principle immediately appealing, but it is important to pause over its sources and its limits. If you believe that it is objectively important how your life goes, then you should consider this important question. Do you value your life as objectively important in virtue of something special about your life, so that it would be perfectly consistent for you not to treat other human lives as having the same kind of importance? Or do you value your life in that way because you think all human life is objectively important?

The relationship between you and your life is indeed special: the second principle, of authenticity, assigns you responsibility for it. But that is a different matter. I am asking about the first principle. Do you have a reason to care whether every person’s life succeeds or fails, or just whether yours does? True, few people care as much about your situation as you do: your own fate may capture your attention as almost no one else’s does. But that can be explained by the special responsibility I just mentioned. So you should focus further on the question whether the objective importance of your life reflects a universal importance—your life has that value only because it is a human life—or a special importance because you have some property that some other people do not have.

Subjective value is in its nature special. Coffee has value only for those who like coffee, and though this might conceivably be all the people alive at a given moment, that could be true only by accident. But objective importance is independent of taste or belief or desire, and it is therefore independent of any distinct emotional relationship, including one based on identity. Because there are no metaphysical value particles, objective value cannot be a bare fact: there must be some case to be made for it. What case could someone make that his importance is special?

Many people hold the opposite, universal view. Many religions teach that a god made human beings in his own image and has equal concern for them all. Secular humanitarians believe that human life is sacred and that the failure of any life is a waste of a cosmically valuable opportunity.➀ Most people react emotionally to the actual and even fictional tragedies of complete strangers on either a small or very grand scale. We weep for Adonis and we weep for the anonymous foreign victims of earthquakes and tsunamis. The universal view hangs together admirably with this set of familiar opinions and reactions.

What case could someone make for the opposite, special view: that only the lives of people like him have objective importance? He cannot rely on any form of global skepticism, because he accepts that his own life has objective and not merely subjective importance. He needs a positive case. It would not be enough, as I said, to point to his special responsibility for his life. Curators have distinct responsibilities for protecting particular paintings, but they accept that paintings in other museums have objective value as well.

One other claim has been all too popular in history, however, and remains sadly popular over much of the world still now. He might think that some property he has makes his life specially important from an objective perspective. He is an American or a Jew or a Sunni or a talented musician or brilliant collector of matchbook covers, and he might think that whichever of these properties he has gives objective importance to the life of any person who has it. I doubt that many readers of this book hold any such view—no religion with any genuine traction in the Western democracies would countenance it—but its more general popularity makes it important to notice it.

Of course there is much that does distinguish you from other people: your talents, nation, religion, and race. Some of these properties, at least, might be important to you in considering how you should live: you might take them to be parameters of success for you.➁ You might think that you do not live well unless your life reflects the fact that you are an American or a Catholic or talented at music or matchbook collecting. But we are considering a different claim: not whether personal properties should affect how you live, but whether they account for the objective importance of your living well.

Someone who thought his special properties made his life particularly important would find it difficult to integrate that view with other responsible opinions. Consider Richard Hare’s Nazi who thinks it would be right for others to kill him if it was discovered, to his surprise, that he was actually a Jew.➂ It might be easy enough for him to integrate his opinion into a slightly larger scheme of value: he might insist, for instance, that Jews and other non-Aryan races are naturally inferior human beings. Or perhaps not human at all. But that further opinion would be unlikely to survive much further expansion toward overall integrity. It would be necessary to explain, for example, why Jews are inferior in spite of so many points of biological similarity, confirmed by DNA analysis, between them and Aryans, and any proposed explanation would be likely to make trouble somewhere else in his system of convictions. Are Jews inferior because their ancestors (on a bizarre but popular assumption) killed Christ? But that requires visiting sins of presumed but unidentifiable ancestors on very remote descendants, and Hare’s Nazi might not think himself inferior because of the crimes of some Germanic tribe in the first century. Are Jews inhuman because of the role a few of them played in Weimar economics? Were there no troublemaking Aryan financiers? Is it a matter of a tendency to hook noses? Are these unknown in the Waffen SS? And how, exactly, could objective importance be thought to depend on nasal structure?

Now consider the potential role of religion in defending someone’s claim to special objective importance. Much of the slaughter inspired by religion has presupposed, or at least not denied, the equal importance of the lives of those slaughtered: their death has been thought necessary to save their immortal souls or to spread the true faith and the true laws among their people or simply to stop their real or imagined attempts at desecration. Much more would be necessary to justify a faith’s ethical claim to some special objective importance for its members’ lives. It would be necessary, I imagine, to suppose the creative benediction of a biased god who cares nothing about the conversion of infidels to his worship. Other stories are possible, no doubt, but they are each likely to founder, at least for monotheistic religions, on further embedded assumptions about the range and catholicity of that god’s attention. Monstrous ideas of that sort have been all too popular and all too powerful in our history. But they are impossible to defend responsibly.

There is yet another hurdle for anyone to overcome who thinks his importance special. I said, in Chapter 9, that dignity requires recognition, not appraisal, respect. But there is an important relation between the two: they must divide the territory of self-esteem between themselves, because thinking your life important is a presupposition of thinking that it matters how you live. Hare’s Nazi fanatic would have to think that if he was discovered to be a Jew, it would not then matter at all what he had done with or to his life. Few people could honestly accept that counterfactual release of ethical responsibility.

Nietzsche?

Does the universal view of objective importance reflect only a parochial egalitarian, liberal, democratic political sensibility? It might be useful briefly to consider whether the most famous philosophical critic of that sensibility rejected the universal view. Nietzsche certainly thought that only a few people—he counted himself among them—were capable of truly distinguished lives. But did he think what is plainly different: that it is important only how those few creative supermen live and unimportant what happens to the rest—the ordinary rabble of the earth who are incapable of great lives anyway?

Interpretations of Nietzsche’s ideas differ sharply. But according to several critics Nietzsche accepted (at least in some parts of his not always consistent work) the main themes of our argument so far. He seemed to insist on the surpassing importance of people living well. It is a cosmic shame, he thought, that the priests have imposed on the world the kind of morality that makes living well impossible, the ascetic morality that fights rather than celebrates human nature and tries to sublimate the will to power that is not only natural but the spur and motive to great lives. We must recreate ourselves, he declared, because we have become, in part through this morality, people of slave mentality rather than heroic struggle.

He rejected the subjective view of the importance of living well.➃ We must recreate ourselves not only if we happen to want to be great but because we are not faithful to our human legacy unless we do strive to be great. He insisted that living well is very different from living a good life. Living well, he insisted, might include great suffering, as his life did, which hardly makes for a good life. He also insisted on the sovereign importance of integrity to living well. “The organizing ‘idea’ that is destined to rule … slowly … leads us back from side roads and wrong roads; it prepares single qualities and fitnesses that will one day prove to be indispensable as means toward a whole—one by one, it trains all subservient capacities before giving any hint of the dominant task, ‘goal,’ ‘aim,’ or ‘meaning.’ Considered in this way, my life is simply wonderful.”➄

But it is indeed a further question whether Nietzsche thought that these imperatives hold for all of us or only for those who are capable of greatness. His early spokesman, Zarathustra, speaks not only to the great but to everyone he finds, to all those who he hopes, however pessimistic he may be, will become the next man, not the last man.➅ The “gift” he brings is a gift for the species in general. “A tablet of the good,” he declares, “hangs over every people.”➆ Nietzsche expressed unmitigated disdain for equality, democracy, and the rest of what he called “servile” morality. But he rejected the morality he despised not because it assumes that it matters how everyone lives but because it offers what he thought a despicable account of how everyone should live.

He ridiculed the idea that living well means being happy. He had special contempt for the utilitarians, whose views make no sense except on the assumption that pleasure and happiness are alone important.➇ (He called that assumption “Anglo-angelic shopkeeperdom.”➈ ) To him pleasure and happiness were close to pointless. He also ridiculed Kantians, who recognize the intrinsic value of a human life but suppose that this value can be realized only through a life of moral duty.➉ So though he certainly thought morality as commonly understood a terrible mistake, I know of no reason to suppose that he thought it unimportant, rather than sad, how people in general live. He did think that the will to power makes everyone who has it, on appropriate occasions, angry, competitive, and anxious to show himself special in some way. These are, as he saw, human motives that most of us can subordinate or sublimate only with some difficulty and with, he thought, tragic costs. But there is nothing in the will to power that holds that the same emotions are not just absent but illegitimate in the herd of people.

According to at least one commentator, Nietzsche embraced a form of aggregative consequentialism about good lives: he thought it important that the best lives be lived as greatly as possible, even if that meant less good lives for most people.⑪ But that odd view does not presuppose the subjective view of a life’s importance. It supposes, on the contrary, that there is an overall objective importance in great lives being lived that prescinds from any concern with which people live them. A connoisseur who wants the greatest painting painted, even if that means fewer paintings are, does not think it antecedently important which artist produces those great paintings. Another scholar reports that “in spite of the widespread opinion that Nietzsche opposes all universalization,” “he does not object to seeing one’s values as universally valuable, where one considers them essential to any human flourishing.”⑫ If so, Nietzsche’s hatred of ordinary morality only underscores his assumption that it is important, even if impossible, that everyone live well.

Two Strategies: Balance and Integrity (260)

The first principle of dignity, recast to make plain the objective value of any human life, becomes what I called Kant’s principle. Your reason for thinking it objectively important how your life goes is also a reason you have for thinking it important how anyone’s life goes: you see the objective importance of your life mirrored in the objective importance of everyone else’s. Aristotle distinguished different kinds of love, including friendship, romantic love, and what he called agape, often translated as “altruistic” love, the love we show to everyone.⑬ Agape is the most selfless form of love, but, we now see, it is also love that embraces oneself. Polonius was garrulous and silly, but his final advice to his son was profound and remains so when we invert it. Be not false to any man and you remain true to yourself.

Our question for the rest of the book is this. What are the implications of Kant’s principle for how you must treat other people? It might strike you, initially, that fully accepting the equal objective importance of everyone’s life means always acting so as to improve the situation of people everywhere, counting benefit to yourself and those close to you as each having only the same weight in your calculation as that of any stranger anywhere. This is certainly the conclusion that many philosophers, including but not limited to utilitarians, draw from that equal importance. If so, then it is close to impossible for human beings—as distinct from angels—actually to live as their self-respect requires. The second principle, of authenticity, assigns each of us a personal responsibility to act consistently with the character and projects he identifies for himself. It would seem psychologically impossible for almost anyone to satisfy that principle while nevertheless treating everyone’s plans and projects with as much concern and attention as his own.⑭ Most people in the world are very poor. Many of them lack even the essentials of life, so anyone of even modest wealth who accepted the first principle would, on this view of what it means, have to give everything away and become poor himself. Certainly he would have to abandon dedicating his life to any other projects, no matter how compelling he thought them.

A few philosophers have grasped this nettle: in principle we should try, as best we can, to live the saintly life demanded by the demanding interpretation.⑮ Others have taken a different view that softens the impact (though not the demands) of the first principle out of concern for the second. Thomas Nagel distinguishes two perspectives from which a person might decide how to live.⑯ The first is a personal perspective dominated by his own interests and projects. The second is the impersonal perspective from which his own interests, ambitions, attachments, and projects matter no more than those of anyone else. In Nagel’s view, we find truth from both these perspectives and our difficulty arises because these truths are inconsistent. What seems to make most sense from the personal perspective will often contradict some requirement of the impersonal one. How should we then decide what is, all things considered, the right thing to do? How do we balance the two perspectives? Nagel suggests that a balance would be reasonable if it could be accepted as appropriate by everyone, no matter what his personal situation. He is doubtful that there is in fact a particular balance that satisfies that test. But he is clear that that is the test that must, as an ideal, be satisfied.⑰

However, once we call for a balance or compromise between two perspectives, each of which we take to speak truth, it becomes unclear how we could justify a particular settlement without circularity. Suppose we ask how much of his income it would be reasonable for a university professor to give away and how much it would be reasonable for him to retain for a summer holiday in Europe. It seems impossible to answer without first deciding which of Nagel’s perspectives should govern: from the impersonal perspective, reasonableness looks very different than it does from the personal perspective of someone desperate for a holiday. There is no third perspective—no perspective of “reason” itself—from which the balance might be struck. We can’t know what reason requires without first deciding from which perspective that question should be decided.

Nagel suggests, as I said, a procedural test. He seeks principles for balancing the impersonal and personal perspectives that everyone would find reasonable if he was motivated by the desire to settle on one standard. (Nagel cites and follows Thomas Scanlon’s moral contractarianism.⑱) Nagel is rightly pessimistic that such principles can be found. Why should someone whose situation is worse than anyone else’s not insist that, given the equal importance of human lives, the only reasonable principle is one that divides material wealth in equal shares? Why should someone else, whose situation is somewhat better, not reply that it is unreasonable to remove from the world all the pleasures and achievements that unequal wealth makes possible? No doubt it helps to assume, unrealistically, that everyone wants an agreement. But that is often true of labor negotiations that end in a prolonged strike ruinous for both sides.

Even if there were consensus on how people should act in some particular situation, however, it is unclear why that would be relevant. The consensus would, presumably, contradict the deliverance of either the personal or the impersonal perspective. More likely both. From which perspective should we then decide whether to do what everyone says is reasonable? Suppose everyone thinks it reasonable to do what the impersonal perspective condemns. How can that excuse doing what we think is, from that perspective, wrong? We would have to have already decided that the impersonal perspective is not sovereign about what to do. From what perspective could we have decided that? Nor does it help to say that the final decision must be a practical one. That declares that a decision must be made but is of no help in making it. “Practical” names no third, distinct, perspective. Nor can the right balance be found by asking what we do or should most care about, all things considered. That is just a way—or perhaps two ways—of restating our question.

Our two principles of dignity, on the other hand, do not describe different perspectives that a person might take up that he must then choose between. They describe a single perspective he must occupy if he is ethically responsible. We must not ask for a compromise between these two principles: they are too fundamental and important to compromise. They state conditions necessary to our self-respect and authenticity, and these are not negotiable. So our agenda must be different. We need to find attractive interpretations of the two principles that seem right in themselves—that seem to capture what self-respect and authenticity really do require—and that do not conflict with, but rather reinforce, each other. We need to treat our principles as simultaneous equations to be solved together.

Someone might object: it is fraudulent to set out, right from the beginning, to find interpretations of our principles that avoid conflict. We should rather seek the correct interpretations, and if these produce conflict, we must simply accept this as our fate. That objection ignores the argument of this book so far. Ethical judgments are not barely true. We do seek the correct understanding of our two principles, but that means, for us, an understanding of each that finds support in our understanding of the others and that feels right to us. We have to believe each part of a mutually supportive system of principles in order to suppose that together they are sound.

Our assignment is difficult and we are not promised success. It is easy enough to identify plain violations of one or the other principle. Treating someone else’s suffering or failure with indifference denies the importance of his life; forcing him to practice the rituals of a religion he rejects outrages his ethical responsibility. The issues we confront in the next several chapters are more difficult and controversial, however. We shall have to consider when a failure to help a stranger does show indifference to his life, whether and how the numbers of those we affect count in determining what we should do, what pertinent differences fall between killing someone and letting him die, why we must keep our promises, and whether we owe more by way of aid to members of our own political communities than to those of other communities. So we must push our analysis further to generate more concrete interpretations of our principles, interpretations that we can test in other contexts.

We have no crisp decision procedure to follow. Each of us will finally judge differently from others the issues we consider. But we have a standard each can use to adjudicate. Do the interpretations of self-respect and authenticity we reach support one another and so require no compromise in either dimension of dignity? Can we accept these interpretations in good faith as each sound? Our challenge is in some ways like that posed by John Rawls’s method of reflective equilibrium, but it is more ambitious and more hazardous. Rawls aimed at a kind of integrity among abstract and concrete convictions about justice, but one that allowed subordination, compromise, and balancing among different values. He insisted on a “lexical priority” of liberty to equality, for example. He did not aim to interpret each value in the light of others so that each supported rather than challenged the others. That difference reflects a deeper one. Our strategy is driven by a theory of moral and interpretive truth—the theory described in Chapters 7 and 8—a topic that Rawls did not pursue. Even if we interpret Rawls’s methods to include an ethical component, as I suggest later in this chapter we should, the range of the values he meant to pose in equilibrium is much smaller than those in our field of concern. He thought it wise, particularly as his views developed, to bracket philosophical issues beyond those that can be seen as distinctly political. Our integration project has a centrifugal force that does not allow bracketing: we must attempt as wide a comprehensive theory as we are able to construct, not out of a taste for complexity but out of a philosophical necessity. We need to integrate theories of truth, language, and metaphysics with and into the more familiar realms of value. If you continue to join in that ambition, we are still both out on a limb. You may think we have fallen already; if not we must see whether we fall now.

More Moral Philosophers (264)

Kant

I pause, before we begin on our list of topics, to pick up a different thread. It is an ancillary project of the book to see how far the interpretive approach to morality helps us understand the important classics of moral philosophy. In Chapter 8 I described the explicitly interpretive arguments of Plato and Aristotle; I said that each aimed at the integration of ethics and morality that is our goal as well. I end this chapter by considering how far the work of other philosophers, although less explicitly interpretive in the same way, might be recast with profit in that mode.

The most influential philosophical theories owe their influence—even among professional philosophers, but certainly any wider influence—not to the power or cogency of their arguments but to the imaginative impact of their conclusions and the metaphors in which these are presented. That is true, I believe, of Plato’s cave and Rawls’s original position, for example. It is most dramatically true of Kant. The very general principles he declared—that we must never act in ways we could not rationally wish that everyone act, for instance—have had enormous influence even among academic philosophers who reject many of his more concrete opinions. His powerful warning that we must treat other people as ends and never merely as means is daily repeated in legal and moral argument across a great part of the world. But the arguments he supplied for these very influential principles are comparatively weak, in my own view, and the theories of freedom and reason he offered are opaque to almost all of those who are drawn to those principles.

However, Kant’s writings on moral philosophy contain all the ingredients of what I believe to be a more accessible interpretive argument for those principles. It is not my aim (nor is it within my power) to add to the formidable volume of Kant exegesis. I want rather to suggest a way of reading Kant (whatever else it ignores in his writing) that tracks the methods I propose to follow here. That reading begins in ethics: with ethical demands that match the two principles of dignity we have now recognized. Kant’s “principle of humanity” is in the first instance about the mode in which we must value ourselves and our own goals: we must see these as objectively, not just subjectively, important. We must think, as our first principle insists, that it is objectively important how our lives go.

We draw the appropriate conclusion in what I called Kant’s principle: if the value you find in your life is to be truly objective, it must be the value of humanity itself. You must find the same objective value in the lives of all other persons. You must treat yourself as an end in yourself, and therefore, out of self-respect, you must treat all other people as ends in themselves as well. Self-respect also requires that you treat yourself as autonomous in one sense of that idea: you must yourself endorse the values that structure your life. That demand matches our second principle: you must judge the right way to live for yourself and resist any coercion designed to usurp that authority.

These two demands of dignity pose the interpretive challenge I have described. There could be no option, for Kant any more than for us, of resolving this stark conflict by balancing or compromising the two demands. Any compromise would necessarily be, for Kant as for us, a sacrifice of our dignity. His response was therefore to offer better interpretations of the two demands. He understood autonomy to mean not freedom to pursue whatever inclinations we might have but freedom that includes freedom from those inclinations. We are autonomous when we act out of respect for the moral law rather than to serve some particular goal: our own pleasure, for example, or what we take to be a good life, or some more transcendent value, or even to relieve the suffering of others.

That interpretation explains why autonomy has the commanding importance he assigned it. We would not respect our lives as having intrinsic and objective value if we dedicated our lives to achieving some one or another of these particular goods. We would be treating our lives as having value only as means to those ends. We must rather treat our freedom as an end in itself rather than a means to something else, and we do that by supposing that we are free when we act out of the moral law, not when we ignore it. That does not mean simply acting consistently with what the moral law demands. “For if any action is to be morally good, it is not enough that it should conform to the moral law—it must also be done for the sake of the moral law.”⑲

That view of autonomy matches our account of moral responsibility in Chapter 6. When we take up the project described there, we aim that our moral convictions provide our actual motives, filtering out those influences of our personal history that press for contrary behavior. But Kant’s reconciliation of autonomy with respect for others requires something more substantive: some statement of the content of what autonomy so understood requires. How do I treat others along with myself as ends in themselves? Kant does not answer that I must act impartially in all matters. He offers a different and much less demanding kind of universalism: we must act in such a way that we can will the principle of our action to be universally embraced and followed. A person respects his own intrinsic ethical value through such principles because, as Kant puts it, “it is precisely the fitness of his maxims to make universal law that marks him out as an end in himself.”⑳

Kantian scholars puzzle and disagree about what that somewhat opaque formula, about willing a law to be universal, actually means, as they puzzle and disagree about much else in his theories.㉑ But the general thrust is clear enough: treating people with the respect we accord ourselves requires, at a minimum, that we claim no right in ourselves that we do not grant others and suppose no duty for them we do not accept for ourselves. In the language of American constitutional lawyers, respect for all requires equal protection of the moral law. That constraint does not, in itself or by likely implication, require each of us always to act as if his own life was of no more concern to him than that of anyone else. Kant offers his theory as an interpretation of ordinary moral practice, and his various examples of what laws we cannot coherently will to be universal are designed to produce moral requirements that are familiar.㉒

This reconstruction of Kant’s argument bends it toward the argument of this book—perhaps past the breaking point, though I hope not. I mean to show that Kant’s claims are most persuasive when understood as an interpretive account linking ethics and morality. Each element in this structure of moral and ethical ideas contributes to the case for the other elements. Whether we start in the moral law or in the ethics of self-respect, we generate the same structure. Certainly Kant did not suppose that acting for the sake of the moral law necessarily or even usually produces a good life. But he did think it would mean living well, with full self-respect and autonomy. The Kantian system so understood is an impressive piece of active holism.

I concede that I have entirely ignored much argument that many Kantian scholars think most distinctive and important: his metaphysics and the theory of reason articulated in his critiques. He supposed himself to have shown, in the first two sections of his Groundwork, that autonomy is possible only if we are capable of acting out of the moral law whose form he described. In the third section he undertook to defend that possibility against the threat of determinism. In the phenomenal world we occupy, the world of science, autonomy seems impossible, because in that world our actions are determined by prior events beyond our control. But we inhabit another world as well—the world as it is in itself, not as it appears to us. We cannot in the nature of the case discover the nature of that noumenal world, but we can and must assume that in that world we do have the freedom that makes autonomy and morality possible. Kant held, that is, that responsibility and determinism are incompatible. I argued in the last chapter that his view is mistaken. If he had accepted a compatibilist position, he would have thought judgmental responsibility a phenomenon entirely explicable within what he called the phenomenal world.

Rawls

In Chapter 3, discussing the constructivist approach to moral theory, I said that Rawls’s theory is not best understood as skeptical of objective moral truth in any but a limited internal sense. He meant to rely only on principles inherent in the political traditions of the community he addressed, but he needed substantive moral assumptions to decide what those traditions should be taken to be. Now we may consider his theory again, on that assumption. I quoted his important remark that “first principles of justice must issue from a conception of the person through a suitable representation of that conception as illustrated by the procedure of construction in justice as fairness.”㉓ That representation must suppose that people are “autonomous in two respects: first, in their deliberations they are not required to apply, or to be guided by, any prior and antecedent principles of right and justice … Second, they are said to be moved solely by the highest-order interests in their moral powers and by their concern to advance their determinate but unknown final ends.”㉔ He described these “moral powers” as, first, “the capacity for an effective sense of justice” and, second, “the capacity to form, revise and rationally to pursue a conception of the good.”㉕ This set of assumptions about people’s attitudes and interests, Rawls thought, justifies the structural features of his original position strategy.

But it cannot do this unless we interpret this “conception of the person” in a very special way. If we read Rawls’s account in what might seem the most natural way, nothing in it helps to justify the veil of ignorance. His people are assumed to have the capacity for a sense of justice. They are assumed to want to advance their “final ends” and to have the further capacity rationally to consider what those ends should be. They know that each of the others also has these capacities to a “minimum” degree. But nothing explains why they should not have exercised these two capacities before instructing their representatives at the convention. Each representative could then negotiate to secure what his principal believes a more just society, having due regard to his own view of the right final ends for him and, perhaps, everyone. This conception of the person seems, so far, to contribute nothing to the explanation of why the original position has the design Rawls gave it.

We might, however, interpret Rawls’s account in a different way: we might read much more into the stipulation that his people are “autonomous.” We might assume, for instance, that this means that they treat their lives as having objective importance, that they therefore think that every other human being has a life of the same objective importance, and that they therefore believe that they insult their own dignity when they urge political arrangements that neglect the importance of anyone’s life. Suppose we assume, also, that autonomous people not only want to pursue what they take to be a good life for themselves but also, and more fundamentally, want to live well, and that they think, moreover, that living well means living in a way that does not insult their own dignity in that way. If we elaborate Rawls’s conception of the person in that fashion, then the conception does figure as a supporting element for the original position device and its veil of ignorance. It can then be seen as serving the participants’ shared interest in living well, on the ethical assumptions just described, because it allows them to concentrate on the crucial question of which institutions would respect their dignity—by defining, for instance, a share of community resources that respects the equal importance of everyone’s life.

This interpretation puts Rawls’s disclaimer, that the parties in the original position do not rely on any antecedent theory of justice, in a more nuanced way.㉖ They accept, and bring to the original position, the political consequence of the theory of autonomy just described. They assume that the basic structure of government they choose must show equal concern and respect for all the political community’s members. In that very abstract sense they do assume an egalitarian account of justice. But they do not assume any more concrete interpretation of that egalitarian standard: that is for their representatives to construct behind the veil of ignorance. We shall see, in Part Five, that there are many candidate interpretations of that abstract principle: these range from a utilitarian to a libertarian interpretation. So we understand Rawls’s disclaimers as denying that his participants assume any particular interpretation, such as, for instance, what I call equality of resources in Chapter 16.

The suggested understanding of the original position makes use of our distinctions and, once again, it bends Rawls’s theories toward our own. But again, I hope, not past the breaking point. However, interpreting Rawls’s “conception of the person” in this way might change certain of the conclusions he reaches. It might not vindicate his “difference” principle that allows inequalities in wealth only so far as these benefit the worst-off group in the community; our two principles require the rather different conception of economic equality I describe in Chapter 16. I must also concede that this interpretation does not respect the distinction Rawls emphasized in his later work between a strictly political theory, drawn from what he called “public reason,” and a more comprehensive ethical and moral theory. I have relied, throughout this book and in this reading of Rawls’s argument, on comprehensive ethical and philosophical claims about the objective importance of human life and the nature and limits of various forms of ethical as well as moral responsibility. I have argued elsewhere that Rawls’s “public reason” constraints are unwise and would bar his own most influential arguments from official political discourse.㉗ If I am right, that fact offers another reason for interpreting his main argument in this more comprehensive way.

Scanlon

In his book What We Owe to Each Other, Thomas Scanlon argues that we should treat other people in ways required by principles that no one could reasonably reject.㉘ He imposes no veil of ignorance on people who are called upon to judge which principles these are: they must decide themselves what aspects of their situation and which of their preferences and convictions are pertinent to that judgment. Nor does he suppose that people would all reach the same judgment. He indicates a range of judgment that reasonableness would require of people without supposing that everyone would make all the judgments within that range in the same way. His exercise is nevertheless sufficiently ex ante to show the reciprocal impact of ethical and moral ideas. He thinks that living well includes having or developing a certain attitude toward other people, and that one of the manifestations of that attitude is a desire to be able to justify one’s conduct to them in the way he describes. He supposes that living well requires certain attitudes, which is not yet a moral claim, and that these attitudes essentially define which moral principles we should accept.

The idea of reasonableness plays a crucial role in Scanlon’s overall argument. Some commentators have complained that because reasonableness is itself a moral ideal of just the kind his theory is meant to explain, the theory is circular for that reason.㉙ But that objection is seriously misplaced, because it overlooks the interpretive complexity of Scanlon’s argument. True, the concept of reasonableness is often used to make moral claims: “Under the circumstances,” we might say, “it was reasonable of him to lie.” But reasonableness is also an ethical standard: we think that someone who devotes a substantial part of his life to collecting matchbook covers is not just wrong but silly: his choice is not ethically reasonable. In fact the concept plays just the bridge role, between dignity and morality, that we are now exploring. It is unreasonable of you to favor your own interests in circumstances when the benefit to you is relatively trivial and the cost to others very large. That is unreasonable because it is inconsistent with recognizing the objective as well as subjective importance of your own life. It is not unreasonable to favor yourself, however, when that means only that you have weighed the impact of some decision on your own life more heavily than its impact on someone else’s life: that does not imply any failure to accept that his life is objectively just as important as yours.

===============================================================================

➀ I defend that view in Life’s Dominion (New York: Knopf, 1993).

➁ Ronald Dworkin, Sovereign Virtue: The Theory and Practice of Equality (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000), chapter 6. I discuss ethical parameters in Chapter 9.

➂ R. M. Hare, Freedom and Reason (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1965), 130.

➃ See Tamsin Shaw, Nietzsche’s Political Skepticism (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2007), particularly chapter 5. Shaw points out that Nietzsche is often taken to be an “anti-realist” who denies the existence of objective and universal values, and she denies that reading. She argues that Nietzsche is skeptical about the legitimacy of any coercive political state, not because he doubts the objective character of value but because he doubts that those likely to become political leaders have the ability to discover objective value. See also Simon May, Nietzsche’s Ethics and His War on “Morality” (New York: Oxford University Press (1999).

➄ Nietzsche, Ecce Homo, trans. W. Kaufmann (New York: Vintage, 1967), II:9.

➅ Thus Spoke Zarathustra, in The Portable Nietzsche, ed. Walter Kaufmann (New York: Viking, 1954).

➆ Ibid., I:15.

➇ Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil, trans. W. Kaufmann (New York: Vintage, 1966), §228.

➈ Nietzsche, The Will to Power, trans. Walter Kaufman and R. J. Hollingdale (New York: Random House, 1967), 944.

➉ The Antichrist, in Kaufmann, The Portable Nietzsche, 11.

⑪ See Thomas Hurka, Perfectionism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993), 75.

⑫ May, Nietzsche’s Ethics, 13, 12.

⑬ Aristotle, The Nicomachean Ethics, 572–73.

⑭ Bernard Williams illustrates the psychological dilemmas in an admittedly extravagant example: a tourist to a dictatorship is told that ten innocent prisoners will be killed unless he himself kills one of the ten. Williams, “A Critique of Utilitarianism,” in J. J. C. Smart and Bernard Williams, eds., Utilitarianism For and Against (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973), 76, 98.

⑮ See Peter Singer, The Life You Can Save: Acting Now to End World Poverty (New York: Random House, 2010). See also Thomas Nagel, “What Peter Singer Wants of You,” New York Review of Books, March 25, 2010.

⑯ This distinction marks much of his work. See the discussion in Chapter 10 of his views about free will and judgmental responsibility. I have particularly in mind, in the discussion here, his book Equality and Partiality (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991), e.g., 14.

⑰ Ibid., 31.

⑱ T. M. Scanlon, What We Owe to Each Other (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2000).

⑲ Immanuel Kant, Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals, trans. H. J. Paton (New York: Harper and Row, 1964), 58.

⑳ Ibid., 35.

㉑ For a recent illustration, see Robert N. Johnson, “Value and Autonomy in Kantian Ethics,” in Oxford Studies in Metaethics, vol. 2, ed. Russ Shafer-Landau (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).

㉒ See the many discussions of Kant’s ambitions in John Rawls, Lectures on the History of Moral Philosophy (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000).

㉓ John Rawls, Collected Papers, ed. Samuel Freeman (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999), 346.

㉔ Ibid., 315.

㉕ Ibid., 312.

㉖ See the discussion of Rawls’s constructivism in Chapter 3.

㉗ Ronald Dworkin, Justice in Robes (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2006), chapter 9.

㉘ Scanlon, What We Owe to Each Other.

㉙ Colin McGinn, “Reasons and Unreasons,” New Republic, May 24, 1999.

===============================================================================

Key concepts:

autonomy (265): you must yourself endorse the values that structure your life; the second principle
We are autonomous when we act out of respect for the moral law rather than to serve some particular goal
moral responsibility

Kant’s principle (260): a proper form of self-respect entails a parallel respect for the lives of all human beings
if the value you find in your life is to be truly objective, it must be the value of humanity itself (265)

personal perspective vs. impersonal perspective (261)

objectivizing the first principle:
- subjective value is in its nature special and true only by accident
- objective importance is independent of taste or belief or desire
- objective value cannot be a bare fact
- dignity requires recognition respect
- Kant’s principle: the objective value of any human life