12 Aid (271)

A Calculus of Concern

Dignity and Wrongdoing

What must we do for strangers—people with whom we have no particular connection, people who may live at the other end of the earth? We have no special relationship with them, but their lives are of equal objective importance to our own. Of course, special relationships are numberless and embracing. Politics, in particular, is a fertile source of them: we have distinct obligations of aid to those who are joined with us under a single collective government. But I ignore these special relationships in this chapter; they are the subject of Chapter 14. I discuss here, moreover, only what we must do for strangers, not what we must not do to them. In the next chapter I argue that we have much stricter responsibilities not to harm strangers than we have to help them.

I have already described the strategy of these chapters. We try to decide what we must do for—and not do to—other people by asking what behavior would fail to respect the equal importance of their lives. That might strike you as topsy-turvy: acts deny someone’s equal importance only when they are wrongful, you might think, so we must first decide what acts are wrong, not the other way around. Under our interpretive strategy, however, as I said earlier, neither of these two directions of argument has final priority over the other. We need convictions about the two principles of dignity and about right and wrong behavior that all seem correct after reflection and that fit together so that the inferences hold in both directions. I stress one of these directions here, from dignity to morality, because our ambition is now to locate morality in ethics and that means beginning in the conception of dignity I sketched in Chapter 9.

Dignity and Welfare

Wealth and luck are very unevenly distributed among human beings, so we often find ourselves in a position to help strangers who are in worse case than us either generally or because they have suffered some accident or are in some special danger. Two kinds of conflict may arise on such occasions. First, we may face a conflict between our own interests and those of the people we might help. How far need we go out of our way to help them? Second, we may face a conflict about whom to help when we can only help some of them. If we can rescue only some victims of an accident and must leave others to die, how shall we decide whom to save? Together these puzzles pose the question of aid.

Kant’s answer to that question—he said in different ways that we should treat strangers as we would wish them to treat us—is helpful because that formula fuses ethics and morality in the way we now seek: it takes an ex ante approach that integrates our hopes for our own lives with our sense of our responsibilities to others. We must find an allocation of the costs of bad luck that seems right from both an ethical and a moral point of view. If we think we have no moral duty to help others bear their bad luck, it must also seem right, as a matter of ethical responsibility, that we ourselves should bear the costs of our own bad luck in similar circumstances. But though Kant’s formulations tie the underlying issues together in that helpful way, they do not help us decide them.

I restate the simultaneous-equation problem described in the last chapter. We must show full respect for the equal objective importance of every person’s life, but also full respect for our own responsibility to make something valuable of our own life. We must interpret the first demand so as to leave room for the second, and the other way around. You would find that impossible, I said, if you were once persuaded of the ultra-demanding interpretation of the first principle I mentioned—that it requires you to act with the same concern for the well-being of any stranger, day by day, as you do for your own well-being. You would then be unlikely to find any plausible interpretation of the second principle that did not conflict with the first.

Fortunately the ultra-demanding interpretation is a poor reading of the first principle. We should notice, first, that this reading makes no sense as I just described it, because we have no metric of well-being that could sensibly supply the comparisons it requires. Someone’s well-being is not a commodity that can be measured. It is a matter of having a good life, and we have no appropriate way to measure or compare the goodness or success of different lives. “Well-being” consequentialists, as they might be called, have tried to invent conceptions of well-being that do make it a commodity of some kind. Some say that a person’s well-being at any moment is the surplus of the pleasure he enjoys over the pain he suffers, and that we can therefore calculate a person’s overall well-being by measuring the total glows of his pleasure and then subtracting the total stabs of his pain. Others say that someone’s well-being is a matter of how many of his ambitions are realized, so that we measure total well-being by counting up ticks of desire satisfaction and subtracting ticks of desire frustration. Still others claim that well-being can be defined in terms of people’s capabilities for achieving what they do or might want to achieve. For reasons I have described elsewhere, none of these familiar philosophical conceptions of well-being can provide a plausible basis for a personal or political morality.➀

The concepts of welfare, well-being, and a good life are interpretive concepts. People disagree about the right conception of what makes a life good—about how important it is to enjoy oneself or to satisfy desires or to develop capabilities, for instance. So a policy of making any of these particular commodities “equal” would shortchange many people and so destroy any initial appeal that an abstract statement of welfare consequentialism might enjoy. Of course, each of us can try to make it easier for other people to live well according to their own lights. We can work, for example, toward a more equal distribution of wealth and other resources. To some extent—particularly in the circumstances discussed in Part Five—we do have that responsibility. But that is not the same as trying to make their lives better lives to have lived. Well-being egalitarianism is not just impossibly demanding; it is a philosophical mistake.

Kant’s principle changes the subject: it speaks not to well-being as a goal but to attitude as a guide. We must treat other people consistently with accepting that their lives are of equal objective importance to our own.➁ Failing to help someone else is not necessarily inconsistent with that attitude. That is true of other kinds of value as well. I might recognize the enormous objective value of a great collection of paintings and yet accept no personal responsibility for helping to protect that collection. I might have other priorities. So I may recognize the objective importance of the lives of strangers without supposing that I must subordinate my life and interests to some collective or aggregate interest of them all, or even to any single one of them whose needs are greater than my own. I can accept with perfect sincerity that your children’s lives are no less important objectively than the lives of my own and yet dedicate my life to helping my children while I ignore yours. They are, after all, my children.

I do not deny the equal importance of human life just by refusing to make admirable sacrifices. Perhaps I can save many people from a catastrophe by embracing or risking the catastrophe myself. The soldiers who volunteered to be bitten by mosquitoes carrying yellow fever are rightly treated as heroes. But I would not imply that I regarded the lives of others as intrinsically less important than my own if I refused to volunteer. I have won an Aegean cruise in a lottery; I look forward to it but then learn from a mutual friend that a classical scholar whom I don’t know has longed for such a cruise for years but is unable to afford it. It would be an act of generosity for me to let the scholar take the cruise. But I don’t imply that his life is objectively less important than mine if I take the cruise myself.

However, there is a limit to how far I can consistently ignore something that I claim has objective value. I cannot be indifferent to its fate. If I am in a gallery that is bursting into flames and I can easily take an important painting with me as I leave, I cannot leave it to burn and expect people to take seriously my tributes to the painting’s surpassing value. In some circumstances—philosophers call these “rescue” cases—failing to help a stranger would show the same indifference toward the importance of human lives. You are on a beach, and not far off shore an elderly lady, Hecuba, cries out that she is drowning. You are nothing to her and she nothing to you. But you can easily save her, and if you do not you cannot claim to respect human life as objectively important. How shall we draw the line? The test is interpretive. Which acts, in which circumstances, show a failure to respect the objective and equal importance of human life? This is not a matter of what someone, even sincerely, happens to believe. He shows disdain for human life by turning away from a drowning victim, even if he disagrees that he does. We need an objective test, even though an objective test cannot be mechanical because it must pose questions of interpretation that different interpreters will answer somewhat differently. Our test must aim to structure this interpretation by pointing to the factors that must count and in what way, but it cannot be sufficiently detailed to render verdicts in advance in difficult or marginal cases. Any plausible test will make room for three factors: the harm threatened to a victim, the cost a rescuer would incur, and the degree of confrontation between victim and potential rescuer. These factors interact—a very high or low score on any of them will lower or raise the threshold of impact of the others. But it will be easiest to discuss them separately.

Metric of Harm

It is obviously pertinent what kind and level of threat or need a stranger faces. How shall we measure this? We have already rejected a strict comparative measure: you have no duty to help someone just because his situation is in some way worse than your own. You can acknowledge the objective importance of a stranger’s life without supposing that you must not have more money or opportunity than he does. The comparative standard is indeed of the essence of certain special obligations. I argue in Chapter 14 that it is at the heart of certain political obligations: in your political capacity as voter or official, you must do your part to ensure that your state shows equal concern for the fate of all under its dominion. That political obligation may in some way extend beyond national boundaries. But you do not, just acting as an individual, have any such obligation to all human beings just out of respect for their humanity.

So we need to measure the character of the threat or need the victim faces independently of whether his situation is overall worse than the potential rescuer’s. But should we use a subjective test? Should we judge the degree of harm or loss as the victim judges it? Thomas Scanlon offers this case: a stranger asks our help in the enormously expensive project of building a temple to his god, a project he deems more important than life itself.➂ It seems clear, as Scanlon says, that we have no duty to help. We have no such duty even if he is right to treat his project as so important; indeed, even if his life will be ruined in his eyes if he cannot achieve it. That follows from the allocation of responsibility imposed by the two principles of dignity. It falls to each of us to design his life with an eye to the resources that he can expect will be at his disposal, at least if he is treated fairly. We cannot expect others to subsidize the expensive choices we make.➃

Scanlon’s reminder is necessary for those who believe that morality begins in a categorical requirement to treat everyone’s interests as equally important in whatever we do. For it seems natural from that beginning to allow people themselves to judge when their position has been improved by what we do; we could reject the victim’s judgment only by supposing that we know better than he where his overall interests lie. But once we reject that categorical requirement and base our morality instead on an interpretive judgment about what shows disrespect for human dignity, the calculations in play are very different. We must measure a victim’s danger or need objectively by asking, not how bad he believes it to be, given his plans and ambitions, but how far it deprives him of the ordinary opportunities people have to pursue whatever ambitions they choose. That measure is more appropriate to identifying cases in which the threat or need is so great that a failure to respond displays an improper lack of concern for the importance of another human life.➄

Metric of Cost

Whatever the character and magnitude of the harm threatening a stranger, my responsibility to prevent that harm is greater when I can do so with less risk to or interference with my own life. Again, the interpretive character of our test makes that point clear. When I can prevent a serious harm with relatively little risk or inconvenience to myself, failing to do so is less easily defended as consistent with an objective respect for human life. When the risk or inconvenience is greater, it is more plausible to plead the importance of my personal responsibility for my own life. When lawyers are asked to offer examples of the difference between law and morality, they are very likely to say, out of ancient law school tradition, that we have no legal duty to shove a child’s face out of a puddle in which it is drowning as we stroll by. The example is powerful because the moral duty the law refuses to enforce is so uncontroversial. The threat to the child is at one extreme of harm, and the effort required of us at the other extreme of cost.

But now the hard question. Shall we measure the cost of rescue by taking a potential rescuer’s own sincere assessment at face value, or should we strive for a more objective measure? Reverse Scanlon’s story: suppose you can help save someone from starvation, but only by diverting funds from your lifelong, arduous, and expensive attempt to build a temple to your god. Could you claim to respect human life if you refuse to help? That is a fanciful example, but it is easy to find real ones. Need you give any money to starving people in Africa when you need every cent for your own expensive research? Or to buy a more expensive lens for your camera in search of greater photographic fulfillment?

It may seem, at first, that it must be your own assessment of the cost that counts. The question is still interpretive—it asks when your refusal to help signals a lack of respect for the objective importance of human life—and that depends on what the cost of that help would mean to you, not what it might mean to someone with different ambitions. But there is another dimension to the question: does your total dedication to the temple or research or your hobby itself reflect the proper respect for the importance of other people’s lives?➅ In Chapter 9 I conceded that someone might have a good life in spite of his callous indifference to the suffering of others: I imagined a murderous Renaissance prince whose life was nevertheless a good one. It is a different question whether someone who chooses such a life through those means has shown the self-respect his dignity demands.

I do not suggest what I earlier denied: that self-respect requires each person to view his own life as entirely at the service of others. Some saintly people have done that, and perhaps authenticity would have permitted nothing else for them. Lives lacking a normal attention to the needs of others may also be consistent with self-respect: the life of a dedicated artist or scientist, for instance. In those lives a sense of the objective importance of other people’s fate may be visible even though it does not command rescue in all circumstances in which a less single-minded life would. But anyone who embraces projects that require him to ignore the suffering of others altogether is either irredeemably selfish or fanatical. In either case he lacks self-respect: his sense of an appropriate life is inconsistent with the right regard for the objective importance of the lives of others and therefore of his own. Yes, there is an asymmetry between how we judge the needs of a victim and the cost of rescue to the rescuer. We must take into account not what everyone would regard as an important cost to a rescuer but what is important to him given his sense of what his living well requires for him. But the asymmetry is limited by the condition dignity imposes on that ethical judgment.

Confrontation

The third scale is more difficult to state and justify, but it is real and we cannot make sense of much common moral opinion unless we find place for it.➆ This is the scale of confrontation. It has itself two dimensions. The first is particularization: the clearer it is who will be harmed without my intervention, the stronger the case that I have a duty to intervene. The second is proximity: the more directly I am confronted with some danger or need, the stronger the case that I have a duty to help. I am on the beach too far from the drowning Hecuba to help. There is a man with a boat on the shore who will row me out, but only for fifty dollars, which I can easily afford. Cursing, I promise it to him, as I plainly have a duty to do. He tells me, once the rescue is complete, that he is on the beach every day and will undertake to rescue the next swimmer in trouble by himself, if no other rescuer is there, if I will pay him another fifty dollars in advance. I believe I have no duty to do that or to make any other provision for rescue when I myself am not there. Why not?

From an impersonal moral perspective of the kind I described earlier, it would be hard to justify a duty to pay the boatman to rescue Hecuba but not a duty to pay him to rescue the next person in danger of drowning. I would owe no less to the anonymous person who will otherwise drown next week than I owe to Hecuba today. We might try to distinguish the two cases by appealing to the role of salience. It would be too demanding to expect any person to respond to even grave danger wherever and whenever it arises. A general understanding that only people in the immediate area of present danger have an actual duty both eliminates that risk and puts the duty on the person who is in most cases best able to help.➇ But that explanation, even if generally satisfactory, is not available here, because salience is guaranteed by the details of the selfish boatman’s carefully limited offer. He has made the offer to no one else, and if he does make the offer to another visitor to the beach, well in advance of the rescue he promises, that visitor will be in no more salient position than I am now.

Once we reject any general moral duty to show the same concern for all strangers as for ourselves, however, and we ask instead the interpretive question whether refusing aid would deny the objective importance of human life, we can explain the distinction between the cases by citing the confrontation scale of assessment. If a tragic death of a particular, identifiable person is staring us in the face, or unfolding at our feet, we cannot walk away unless we actually are indifferent to life’s importance. Ignoring the impending death of a particular person dying before us would require a callousness that mocks any pretended respect for humanity. My point is not that our duties are generated directly by visceral impact. It is rather that the morality of rescue hinges on an interpretive question, and that we must take natural human instincts and behavior into account in answering that question. We aim to make best sense of behavior, and we therefore cannot ignore the responses that a genuine respect for life normally provokes.➈

The confrontation scale is also at work in a different kind of example, one that has puzzled economists. Any political community must judge, on some cost-accounting basis, how much to spend to prevent accidents of different kinds, whether through public or private spending. No community spends until no more spending would marginally improve safety: that would be deeply irrational. Yet when an accident does occur—a cave-in traps miners below ground, or an equipment failure traps astronauts in space—and particular identified people are at risk of death, we expect a community to spend much more than it would have cost to prevent accidents of that kind. Again, the dimension of confrontation explains the difference. We cannot ignore the threatened deaths of particular people in the way we can discount even highly probable deaths so long as the people who will die remain statistical and anonymous. Even in collective decisions of that kind, however, the confrontation metric does not always outweigh the other two dimensions—of harm and cost. It does not seem wrong for a community to devote so much of its total health care budget to disease prevention that it cannot afford expensive end-of-life care that prolongs life for only a short time.➉

Great suffering may seem to make confrontation irrelevant. The starvation and disease of a massive number of peoples in Africa and elsewhere stands very high on the needs scale: even a moderate amount of foreign aid judicially used could save a great many of their lives. Their plea also stands very low on the cost scale: very large sums could be raised in aid if the peoples of rich nations each gave an amount small enough as to make no difference at all to the success of their lives.⑪ Those who suffer are very far away, we have no idea who they are, and we have even less idea which of them will die, or why, if we do not contribute to general relief funds. But these facts seem in no way to diminish our obligation to help. If the case for a duty of aid scores high and low enough on the first two scales, of need and cost, that duty cannot be defeated by a low score on the third, confrontation, scale alone.

But even in such cases, I believe, confrontation plays various roles. Though we each have a duty to contribute to charities that try to rescue anonymous people immiserated far away, I do not believe we have a duty to contribute anywhere near as much, in either money or time, for each of them as we must spend, just out of respect for humanity, for a stranger who has fallen at our feet. The greater the publicity given to suffering far away, moreover, the greater is the duty to respond and the shame in not responding. The devastation of the 2004 tsunami in the Indian Ocean and the 2010 earthquake in Haiti was dramatically reported: the huge response of contributions from the first world shows what a difference the impact of immediacy produces. Should it? Lack of television publicity does not excuse us from trying to help relieve suffering we know is there. But the impulse is right that leads us to give more to help those whose suffering is thrust upon us. Consider two charities. One collects aid for distribution to starving people in very poor countries now. The other promises to accumulate its capital to help many more people a century from now. Suppose you do not doubt that the second charity’s capital will grow as its managers promise. I believe you should nevertheless contribute to the first charity now.

Do Numbers Count? (280)

We turn to the second situation I distinguished. Several people need aid, and it would plainly be wrong to ignore them all. But though you are in a position to help some of them, you then cannot help the others. How should you choose among them? There is a standard case—a variation on the drowning swimmer case. One person clings to a life preserver in a storm that has wrecked her boat; sharks circle her. Two other passengers cling to another life preserver a hundred yards away; sharks circle them as well. You have a boat on shore. You can reach one life preserver in time, but then not the other. Assuming all three are strangers, do you have a duty to save the two swimmers and let the lone swimmer die?

That is a staggeringly artificial hypothetical case, designed to focus attention on a philosophical issue without the distraction of reality. But we are surrounded by very real issues that pose the same puzzle. I just described one of them: there are continents of people living in poverty and disease. We can no longer ignore their misery without shame, but most of us can help only a small number of them. Suppose there are several charities we can give to; these operate in different African countries. Must we give to the charity that we judge will save the most people?

It is widely thought that in such situations, if we have a duty to aid at all, we have a duty to aid the most people possible, at least if the harm that threatens them all is comparable. So we have a duty to save two swimmers from the sharks rather than one and to contribute to the charity that we believe will save the most lives with the money we contribute. If we had accepted the impersonal perspective I rejected, which assumes a welfare consequentialist imperative, that would seem the right solution. Well-being is overall improved, we might well think, when two lives rather than one are saved.

But if we approach the decision in another way—by concentrating not on consequences but on rights—it is far from plain that we should automatically save the greater number. We might think that each victim has an equal antecedent right to be saved, and we might therefore be tempted by a lottery in which each shipwreck victim has at least a one-third chance to be saved.⑫ (The sharks agree to circle while the lottery is conducted.)

Which approach is the right one? In which of these two ways should numbers count—as part of a consequential analysis or in giving effect to an assumed right to equal treatment? Philosophers have argued strenuously over this issue. But on the interpretive approach we are now exploring, neither of these approaches is the right one. We have rejected the consequentialist imperative and cannot revive it to justify our conviction, if we have it, that we do better to save a greater over a lesser number of people. We have also rejected any basis for supposing that everyone we can aid has an automatic right to that aid. He has a right only if, under the circumstances, ignoring his need would show disrespect for the objective importance of his life. If you reluctantly allow the lone swimmer to die because you can save two other human beings from death, you have not ignored the importance of anyone’s life.

Suppose you make the opposite choice: to save the lone swimmer and let the others die. If you have a good reason for the choice—the lone swimmer is your wife—then you do not imply or assume that the lives of the two you abandon are objectively less important than hers.⑬ On our interpretive test, that reason need be nothing beyond the fact of your love or your special responsibility. You will also need no further reason if the lone swimmer is not your wife but your friend. Or even if all the swimmers are perfect strangers, the lone swimmer is much younger than the two swimmers, and you think that saving the life of a young person is more important. Or if the swimmers are all strangers, but you know that the lone swimmer is a brilliant musician or philosopher or peacemaker and music or philosophy or peace is particularly important to you or you deem it particularly important to the world. You do not deny the equal importance of all lives when you make such a choice: you know that some must die, and you make judgments of fairness or value to others to decide which. Remember, you would have no duty to rescue the two swimmers even if there were no third swimmer elsewhere but the risk of the rescue to you would be very great. You may put your own safety first without denying the equal objective importance of the two lives you might have saved. Why should you not then be permitted to put the safety of someone else first, whose life you deem to have particular instrumental value either to yourself or to others?

Now a different danger looms. Are there no limits to the proper grounds of a preference you might show among people whose lives are in danger? Suppose you know nothing about the three swimmers but that one of the two who are together is black and the other Jewish while the one who is alone is white and Christian. Would it be consistent with your accepting the equal objective importance of all human lives for you to save the white Christian swimmer and let the others die just because they are a black and a Jew? No, because there are certain grounds of preference that respect for humanity rules out: it rules out preferences that we have good reason to think are expressions or the residue of the contrary conviction that some lives are more important than others.

Once again we can justify our intuitive reaction as an interpretive assumption. In a world in which prejudice thrives, or in which social structures can best be explained by historical prejudice, attitudes and acts that track that prejudice are best understood as reflecting the prejudice absent some strong contrary indication. You can offer a reason why it is particularly important that a musician or a peacemaker survives without supposing that it is objectively more important that their lives flourish than anyone else’s. You can supply a different kind of reason—a reason of fairness—why you should prefer saving the life of a young man rather than of two much older ones. They have already lived substantial lives and he has not. But you can point to nothing about the race or religion of perfect strangers that does not suggest a role in your decision of the conviction that people’s lives are not, after all, really of equal importance.

Now consider the most abstract version of the three-swimmers-and-many-sharks case. Suppose you have no even thin personal reason to save the one who is alone rather than the two who are together, and you have not thrown dice to give each an equal chance to live. But you save one rather than two just because that is what you feel like doing. Perhaps you want to show your freedom from conventional bourgeois expectations. Is that behavior consistent with the conviction that all human life has great objective importance? I think not: it insults the gravity of the occasion. There are occasions for whimsy, but someone who thinks this is one cannot honestly claim to recognize that objective importance. The default decision—when nothing else, even a fair lottery, recommends one decision over another—must be to save two lives, not because this makes the world overall better but because the occasion demands taking life seriously and therefore having some reason beyond whimsy to justify how one acts. The principle that it is better to save more rather than fewer human lives, without regard to whose lives they are, is a plausible, even if not inevitable, understanding of what the right respect for life’s importance requires. The competing principle, that it is better to save fewer than more lives, cannot. That supposed principle is only perverse.

Crazy Cases? (283)

In this chapter I have relied on contrived and bizarre examples of the kind philosophers often use. Some people are suspicious of such examples because, they say, since we do not encounter the situations they describe in our ordinary life, we cannot trust the reactions we have—about whether we should save one drowning person or two, for instance—when we are presented with these examples in academic seminars and texts. That objection presupposes an account of the nature and point of moral philosophy that we have rejected, however. It supposes that moral reflection is in some way a matter of perception: that moral truth impinges on us through some distinct moral sensibility so that our moral “intuitions” are guides to truth in some way at least analogous to perceptions of the world of nature.

If that were right, then it would make good sense to be suspicious of moral perceptions that are provoked not by actual exposure to real events but by descriptions of barely possible events invented as supposedly useful fictions. (We would rightly be suspicious of our impressions of strange animals in an exotic jungle we had never seen.) The interpretive method we are pursuing, however, gives a very different force to bizarre examples. They are like the purely hypothetical cases lawyers imagine to test a principle they propose for an actual case. We confront imaginary cases, not to speculate about what we would perceive if we were actually exposed to them, but in order to see what integrity would require us to accept if we embraced the principles we test in that way. We need not reject proposed principles, however, when we are bewildered or even doubtful whether we would accept them in unrealistic invented cases. It is only principles we are confident we would reject in such cases that we must therefore reject in an ordinary case before our eyes.⑭ I return to this point at the end of the next chapter, in which examples grow even more exotic.

===============================================================================

➀ See Ronald Dworkin, Sovereign Virtue: The Theory and Practice of Equality (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000), chapter 1.

➁ In his recent book Moral Dimensions: Permissibility, Meaning, Blame (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2008), Thomas Scanlon explores different ways in which an agent’s intentions might or might not affect the permissibility of what he does. The argument of this chapter is, I believe, an instance of his suggestion that the “meaning” of an act may make it permissible or impermissible. “If someone acts with no regard whatsoever for the interests of another person, then this has a certain meaning—it indicates something significant about his attitude to that person and about their relationship with each other—whether or not it was his intention to convey.” This is not a matter of the significance anyone else finds in the act but the significance he “has reason to assign to it, given the reasons for which it was performed” (53–54).

➂ Thomas Scanlon, “Preference and Urgency,” Journal of Philosophy 72 (1975): 665–69.

➃ See the discussion of “expensive tastes” in my Sovereign Virtue, chapter 2.

➄ Criticism at the Boston University Law Review conference (mentioned in the Preface) helped me correct an impression that my earlier draft had left: that an example I gave of a high threshold for rescue was meant as necessary as well as sufficient for a duty of rescue. See Kenneth W. Simons, “Dworkin’s Two Principles of Dignity: An Unsatisfactory Nonconsequentialist Account of Interpersonal Moral Duties,” in Symposium: Justice for Hedgehogs: A Conference on Ronald Dworkin’s Forthcoming Book (special issue), Boston University Law Review 90, no. 2 (April 2010) (hereafter BU): 715.

➅ Criticism at the Boston University Law Review conference also made me realize the importance of this aspect of the issue. See Kwame Anthony Appiah, “Dignity and Global Duty,” BU: 661; and F. M. Kamm, “What Ethical Responsibility Cannot Justify: A Discussion of Ronald Dworkin’s Justice for Hedgehogs,” BU: 691. Jeremy Waldron and Liam Murphy raised similar issues in discussions of the draft at the NYU Colloquium in Legal, Moral and Political Philosophy.

➆ For an argument that equal respect requires that we take account of the confrontation dimension in rescue cases, see Richard W. Miller, “Beneficence, Duty and Distance,” Philosophy & Public Affairs 32, no. 4 (2004): 357–83.

➇ Janos Kis offered this suggestion in a paper at a Holberg Prize symposium held at NYU in 2008.

➈ Kenneth Simons cites empirical evidence of the difference confrontation makes. See Simons, “Dworkin’s Two Principles.”

➉ See Dworkin, Sovereign Virtue, chapters 8 and 9.

⑪ See Peter Singer, The Life You Can Save: Acting Now to End World Poverty (New York: Random House, 2009).

⑫ For a lottery in which each person has a 1/3 chance, see John Broome, “Selecting People Randomly,” Ethics 95 (1984): 38–55. For one in which each group has a 1/2 chance, see John Taurek, “Should the Numbers Count?” Philosophy & Public Affairs 6 (1977): 293–316.

⑬ In what is certainly one of the most quoted philosophical remarks of the last century, Bernard Williams said that if you think about whether you are justified in saving your wife rather than several strangers, you have “one thought too many” (Williams, “Persons, Character, and Morality” [1976], reprinted in his Moral Luck [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981], 1–19).

⑭ For a discussion of the role of bizarre examples in philosophical argument, see Kamm, “What Ethical Responsibility Cannot Justify.” I believes she misunderstands my views on this score. See my “Response,” BU: 1073.

===============================================================================

Key concepts:

confrontation (278): immediacy

Kant’s principle as an attitude (273)

metric of cost (276)
  asymmetry between how we judge the needs of a victim and the cost of rescue to the rescuer (277)

metric of harm (275): how far it deprives him of the ordinary opportunities people have to pursue whatever ambitions they choose

metric of well-being (273)

scale of assessment: test for when to help (275)
- metric of harm
- metric of cost
- confrontation

we have much stricter responsibilities not to harm strangers than we have to help them (271)

simultaneous-equation problem: we must show full respect for the equal objective importance of every person’s life, but also full respect for our own responsibility to make something valuable of our own life (272)