13 Harm (285)

Competition and Injury

Here are two sad stories. (1) You are hiking in the Arizona desert with a stranger, you are both bitten by rattlesnakes, and you both see a vial of antidote lying in the scrabble. Both race for it, but you are nearer and grab it. He pleads for it, but you open and swallow it yourself. You live and he dies. (2) As before, but this time he is closer to the antidote, and he grabs it. You plead for it, but he refuses and is about to open and swallow it. You have a gun; you shoot him dead and take the antidote yourself. You live and he dies.

According to a pure version of impersonal consequentialism there is no intrinsic difference in the moral dimensions of these two stories because the result, in itself and judged from a raw impersonal perspective, is the same. If you are young and a popular and accomplished musician, and he is old and useless, you are justified both in taking the antidote yourself in the first story and in shooting him in the second. But if your qualities are the opposite—you are old and untalented and he is the young musician—you are not justified in either action. Your duty is to produce the best result with the resources you have, and the best result is fixed by the properties of the people who die and remain alive, not the mechanics used to produce that best result. Of course, if your act in either story has further consequences, these might make all the difference—for instance, if your act in the second case weakens a useful taboo against murder, that might make your act wrong even though taking the antidote yourself in the first story would not be wrong. But if we suppose that the two acts have exactly the same consequences, because the world learns of neither, then a pure consequentialist must treat them the same.

Stories like these rattlesnake stories are widely regarded as an embarrassment for consequentialism. But many consequentialists are happy in other contexts to rely on the supposed equivalence between killing and letting die. They say that because only consequences count, there is no overall moral difference between allowing someone to die when you can save him and killing him outright. They argue that indifference to starving Africans is morally tantamount to killing them. To most people, however, killing someone seems much worse than simply letting him die. Indeed, to generalize, it seems much worse to injure someone than to decline to help him when you can. According to this more popular view, you are justified in saving the antidote for yourself in the first story but not in killing the stranger to get the antidote in the second one, and even though it is wrong of you not to contribute more to African relief programs, that is not the moral equivalent of flying to Darfur to kill a few Africans yourself. If that is our view, however, we need to explain the difference, since the consequences seem so similar in the two pairs of situations.

Someone might say, as one attempt to justify what seems the natural position, that the consequences in the two stories are not really the same because those consequences include murder and theft in the second story but not the first, and murder and theft are bad. But this supposed explanation only treats itself to the conclusion we want to reach. Why is the murder of a stranger a worse consequence than simply allowing him to die when you could have saved him? It is worse only if killing someone is, just in its nature, worse than letting him die, and that is just what the explanation purports to demonstrate. Nor does it help to say, as some philosophers do, that it is a particular moral crime to aim at someone’s death, that this is worse than just standing by while someone dies even when you could have prevented it. That is how most of us feel, to be sure, but we need to understand why it is worse, because the stranger is dead in both cases and our motive—to save ourselves life, or trouble, perhaps—might be the same in both cases. Some philosophers say that killing someone is worse than not helping him because killing involves a violation of the inviolability of persons. But the claim of inviolability merely restates the general conviction; it does not offer an argument for it.

The consequentialist I described, who thinks that killing and letting die are morally equivalent, follows a morality of self-abnegation. He sees himself as only one of the billions of people whose interests and fate he must weigh impersonally with no special attention to his own position. We are now exploring, in these chapters, a very different approach: a morality of self-affirmation, not anonymity, a morality drawn from and flowing back into our sovereign ambition to live well with dignity. Kant’s principle is the spine of that morality. Dignity requires us to recognize and respect the objective importance of other people’s lives. In that way ethics merges with morality and helps fix its content.

I appealed to Kant’s principle in the last chapter to explain why in some circumstances people do have a duty to aid strangers in great need. I mainly relied, in that argument, on the first principle of dignity. That first principle will not be helpful in solving the puzzle of this chapter, however, because it is equally in play in both of the rattlesnake stories. You do not denigrate the objective value of human life in the first story when you swallow the antidote you grabbed rather than saving the stranger’s life. You only exercise a perfectly consistent preference for your own life. You would not violate the first principle, of course, if you heroically sacrificed you own life so that the stranger might live. But you do not violate it in making the opposite choice either. If so, it cannot be the objective importance of human life that you offend when, in the second story, you shoot the stranger. The same preference for your own life is still at work. Now we must put the second principle of dignity to work in integrating our instinctive moral convictions with our developed sense of living well.

I offer this hypothesis. The second principle insists that you have a personal responsibility for your own life, a responsibility you must not delegate or ignore, and Kant’s principle requires you to recognize a parallel responsibility in others. We need to reconcile these parallel responsibilities by distinguishing between two kinds of harm you might suffer because other people, like you, are leading their own lives with their own responsibility for their own fates. The first is bare competition harm, and the second is deliberate harm. No one could even begin to lead a life if bare competition harm were forbidden. We live our lives mostly like swimmers in separate demarcated lanes. One swimmer gets the blue ribbon or the job or the lover or the house on the hill that another wants. Sometimes, when one swimmer is drowning and another can save him without losing much ground in the race, the latter does have a duty to cross lanes to help. That is the duty we studied in the last chapter. But each person may concentrate on swimming his own race without concern for the fact that if he wins, another person must therefore lose. That inevitable kind of harm to others is, as the old Roman lawyers put it, damnum sine injuria. It is part of our personal responsibility—it is what makes our separate responsibilities personal—that we accept the inevitability and permissibility of competition harm.

Deliberate harm—crossing lanes not to help but to hurt—is a different matter. We need the right to compete to lead our own lives, but we do not need the right deliberately to injure others. On the contrary, if our responsibility for our own lives is to be effective, we each need a moral immunity from deliberate harm by others. In Chapter 6 I distinguished various strands in the overall idea of responsibility; assignment responsibility, I said, fixes who must perform specified tasks and who is therefore to be charged with failure if those tasks are not performed adequately. The second principle fixes on each of us an assignment responsibility for his own life. But assignment responsibility must include a power of control: some power to select which acts are performed in the exercise of the purported assignment. You would not have assignment responsibility for playing black at chess if someone else had the right and power to push the pieces with your hand.

The moral prohibition on deliberate bodily injury defines a core of control that we could not abandon without making a parallel nonsense of our assignment responsibility for our lives. Our responsibility requires at a minimum that we be in sole charge of what happens to or in our own bodies.➀ The prohibition on deliberate injury to property is less important but also central. We cannot lead a life without a high level of confidence in our right and power to direct the use of resources that have been put at our sole disposal by settled political arrangement. It is important not to confuse the right of control we must have to lead our own lives with the right to ethical independence we reviewed in Chapter 9 and will study again in Chapter 17. The latter is compromised when others attempt to make ethical decisions for us; the former when they interfere with our control over our bodies or property for any reason whatever.

The distinction between competition and deliberate harm is therefore crucial to our sense of dignity, even when the injury is trivial. Touching someone without his permission, however gently, violates a taboo. We do consent to others holding a temporary and revocable power over our bodies—lovers, dentists, and rivals in contact sports, for example. In some very limited circumstances paternalism justifies others in seizing temporary control over my body—to stop me harming myself in a moment or hour of madness, for example. But any general transfer of control over the integrity of my body, particularly to those who do not have my interests at heart, would leave my dignity in shreds. Only when we recognize that connection between dignity and bodily control can we understand why killing someone is intuitively horrifying when letting him die, even out of the same motive, is not.

Something makes us recoil from the killing in the second rattlesnake story, though not from self-preservation in the first one, and I believe it is the sense, which may be inarticulate, that granting people a personal responsibility for their own lives requires recognizing for each a zone of immunity from deliberate harm, though not an immunity from competition harm. The image I used, of swimmers keeping to separate lanes, may seem repugnant to the siblinghood of humankind. But it is not Darwin’s picture of nature red in tooth and claw either, and the distinction is crucial. In the first rattlesnake case you are swimming in your own lane and ignoring a stranger drowning in his. In the second you have invaded his lane, usurping his responsibility to control his own life. The difference is invisible from the impersonal perspective; it emerges only when the idea of dignity, also invisible from that perspective, is brought into foreground light.

The connection between harm and personal responsibility explains not only why the distinction between act and omission is genuine and important, but also those special circumstances in which, on the contrary, it has no moral significance at all. It has no significance when the injured person has consented to the injury in the exercise of his own responsibility for his life. It is no violation of dignity for one football player to tackle another or for a doctor to kill a dying patient at the latter’s urgent and reflective request. These are cases of permission, not usurpation. When the Supreme Court considered the constitutionality of laws forbidding doctor-assisted suicide for patients dying in great pain, those who challenged those laws pointed out that the Court had struck down laws forbidding doctors to remove life support from dying patients.➁ Some of the justices replied, rejecting the analogy, that it is morally much worse to kill a patient by administering poison than to let the patient die by removing lifesaving equipment.➂ In the rattlesnake cases that distinction is crucial; in the assisted suicide case it seems bizarre. Focusing on the importance of responsibility to dignity shows why.

Unintended Harm

The baseline picture I drew, of people forbidden to cross lanes deliberately to injure others, is in at least one respect too crude, because it ignores unintended harm. I may sell you a drug that has unanticipated side effects and makes you ill. Or I may drive carelessly and hit you. Or my lion may escape from my apartment to yours, in spite of my efforts to detain him, and maul your sofa. In these events you are injured because of what I have done. I did not harm you deliberately, but these are not stories of pure competition either. You suffer, but not just because I succeed in gaining something you wanted.

These stories take us to the question of liability responsibility that I first described in Chapter 6. Who should bear the cost of these accidents? In the first instance the loss I cause falls on you: you have become ill or have a broken leg or a ruined sofa. Is it appropriate that I compensate you? That is a moral question about compensatory and distributive justice, and also an ethical question about the appropriate connection between judgmental and liability responsibility. I need control over my body and my property to identify and pursue what I take to be a life well lived, and I must grant a like control to you. What scheme of liability responsibility for my choices, and hence for the choices of everyone else, should I therefore endorse? That question demands further interpretation of our second principle.

It requires us to seek a scheme of risk management that maximizes the control we can each exercise over our own fate, given that we must each recognize and respect the same control in others. We can rank schemes on a scale of risk-transfer magnitude. A scheme is lower in risk transfer the more it allows accidental losses to remain with the person on whom they initially fall, and higher in risk transfer the more it places liability responsibility for such loss on someone else. In one sense I gain more control from schemes that are higher in risk transfer, because they leave my plans less impaired when I am accidentally injured than if my loss remained on me. But in another sense I gain more control from schemes lower in risk transfer, because such schemes make me less liable to compensate others for accidents to which I contribute and therefore freer to pursue my plans unchecked by the threat of such liability.

We should therefore aim to identify a scheme of liability responsibility that achieves the greatest antecedent control, trading off gains and losses in control from both these directions. As a first approximation, we insist on a scheme that holds people responsible for losses that could have been prevented by them with greater care and attention. That stipulation allows me greater control over the liability responsibility I will bear for damage I cause to others—I can take greater care—and greater protection from the carelessness of others. The familiar principle that we must take care not to harm others carelessly, like the other principles canvassed in this chapter, is supported by ethics as well as by morality.

But how much care shall we say is due? It would destroy my life, not enhance it, if I were to take as much care as is possible not to harm others. I could not even cultivate my garden. So my goal of enlarging my control over my life needs a more sensitive metric of liability responsibility. In fits and starts, Anglo-American common law has moved toward a standard that was first formulated in quasi-mathematical form by the great judge Learned Hand. He said that the legal standard of due care should depend on what it is fair to expect people to do to avoid the risk of harming others, and that what is fair depends on how great a harm is risked and how probable or improbable it is.➃ His own formulation of that test was designed for commercial contexts and is too crudely monetary for other circumstances. But its structure reflects a general strategy that people anxious to maximize control over their own lives would do well to sponsor.

People each achieve the maximum control when everyone accepts, in principle, that he should bear liability responsibility for damage he has inadvertently caused to others when that damage could have been prevented had he taken precautions that would not have impaired his opportunities and resources as much as the damage he was likely to cause would likely impair the opportunities and resources of others.➄ Of course that is only the template of a standard: it requires appropriate metrics, techniques for discounting uncertainty, and so forth. But in many ordinary circumstances its upshot will be clear enough to common sense. The common law of torts is better explained by that set of interwoven ethical and moral principles than it is by any assumption that the law aims at some stipulated version of economic efficiency.➅

Double Effect (291)

Hard Cases

We have so far concentrated on our responsibility not to harm others in pursuit of our own interests. Moral philosophers have spent more time over a different puzzle: whether and when we may injure some people in order to protect or benefit others. Medical success has supplied these philosophers with outlandish examples. Suppose two patients are in a hospital, each of whom will die without an immediate liver transplant. A doctor has one liver available for transplant; it seems plausible that he is morally permitted to choose between the two potential recipients in a variety of ways. He may flip a coin. Or he may choose the patient whose chances of surviving the operation are better. Or he may choose to save the life of the younger patient rather than the somewhat older one, even though the latter’s prospects for survival with the transplant are just as good. If the doctor chooses any of these decision procedures, he does not violate any rights of the patient who loses, even though the loser will quickly die as a result of his choice.

But now suppose there is only one dying patient, who will survive with a new liver but no liver is available. There is, however, an elderly cardiac patient in the hospital who cannot live more than a few weeks and whose liver could be harvested if he were to die immediately. The doctor may not kill the old man for his liver. Nor may the doctor shut down his respirator in hopes that he will die, or withhold the medication that is keeping him alive for those few more weeks, or not try his best to resuscitate him if he falls into cardiac arrest, assuming that he has not asked not to be resuscitated in that event. Each of these various conclusions seems inescapable, but taken together they may seem troubling. In the two-patient, one-liver case, giving the liver to the younger patient with likely more years to live might be said to show respect for the value of human life. But then why wouldn’t killing the old cardiac patient, or letting him die in cardiac arrest, show the same respect? It would trade a few weeks of an old man’s bedridden life for what would probably be decades of fully active life for the younger patient.

We answer: because the old man has a right not to be killed, even for a great benefit to others, even if he will die soon anyway. His doctor may secretly hope, when he applies the paddles to the old man’s chest, that the shock treatment won’t work. But he must nevertheless do his best to make it work. And it is not just a doctor, who has special professional duties, who has that responsibility. You happen to be in the hospital. You may not kill the old man either, and if you happen to walk past his room and see that his breathing has stopped, you have a duty of rescue. The conditions of that duty plainly hold in these circumstances: the old man would wish to be saved, you can save him at trivial cost to yourself, and he is dying in front of you. You must press the button that will summon the emergency team. But why? In this case turning your back would not indicate disdain for the importance of human life. On the contrary, you would be acting to save life. If two complete strangers are drowning in front of you on a beach, and you can and do save only one, you have violated no duty of rescue to the other one. What is different in this case?

There is an ancient and still fashionable answer; this is called the principle of double effect. It is permissible to let someone die when that is the necessary consequence of rescuing others. So it is permissible for the doctor to save one of two patients who each needs a liver, or for you to save one of two drowning swimmers, even though as a result the other patient or swimmer dies. But it is not permissible to kill someone or even to let him die when this is not just a consequence of your rescuing others but a means you adopt to that end.➆ So it is not permissible to kill the old heart patient who is anyway dying, because the point of killing him—or not saving him—would be that he dies so that his liver is available.

Other ingenious examples of the double-effect principle crowd journals of moral philosophy. You are invited to assume, for instance, that it would be permissible to turn a runaway trolley headed toward five people, who are for some reason strapped to the track ahead, onto another track even though the trolley would then strike one person who is for an equally unknown reason strapped to that other track.➇ But also to assume that if no alternate track was available, it would not be permissible to throw a large stranger who happens to be passing by onto the single track in order to stop the train with his bulk before it reached the others.

The principle of double effect can seem puzzling in just the way that the difference between the two rattlesnake stories can seem puzzling. Why does it matter whether you save five people by turning the trolley so that it kills only one, though you did not intend that death, or whether you throw one person onto the single track intending that he be struck? In both cases the outcome seems better if you act in that way than if you do not; in both cases one person dies and five lives are spared. In neither case is your intention bad or unworthy. Why then should the single difference in your state of mind—whether you treat the unfortunate death as a by-product or a means—make any moral difference at all?

We can inflate the difficulty by switching from the ex post mode in which these puzzles are mainly discussed to the ex ante mode. In the ex post mode we imagine a fat stranger ambling past a track who is killed when consequentialist enthusiasts throw him onto it. There is nothing in that decision for him. But if we consider the matter ex ante, that is no longer true. John Harris imagines a “spare parts lottery” in which people agree that each time at least five of them need an organ transplant and the needed organs can all be harvested from a single body, the healthy members of the group will draw lots to see which of them will be killed for that purpose.➈ Each member of the group would increase his life expectancy by agreeing to this arrangement, and as transplant technology improves the gain in life expectancy might well be considerable. What reason would anyone have not to join? True, the possibility of being swept up for fatal surgery when your number is announced is chilling, and so is the prospect of participating in the murder as one of the surgeons. But dying of cirrhosis or other diseases of organ failure is also a chilling prospect—being murdered is not obviously five times as bad—and American prisons have had no difficulty finding willing executioners for their death rows. True, it would be unsettling to know that at any moment one’s number might be drawn. But is it five times as unsettling as knowing that any casual visit to the doctor might produce a death sentence?

It would seem to be in everyone’s interest to join a spare-parts lottery. We could amend the terms to make this even more evident. We might stipulate that only the names of people past a certain age whose organs were still useful, and who were already in hospital when their organs were needed there, would be in the hat. Then it would be even more plainly in everyone’s interests to subscribe, even though the chance of anyone’s life being saved would be less. Why then is it wrong for us to treat people as if such a lottery had always been in place? Then old people in hospital when their organs were needed could be deemed to have lost a fair lottery they would, if rational, have joined long ago. Enforcing that hypothetical lottery would indeed mean that someone else would treat them, at that point, as only a means—would aim at their death for the sake of others. But if everyone would benefit by the arrangement, why does that matter?

Philosophers have offered various replies. Impersonal consequentialists, horrified that their theory might seem to license spare-parts murders, argue that allowing the practice would erode the taboo against taking life and cause much greater suffering in the long run than it would prevent. That is the kind of whistling-in-the-dark speculation that is often used to save consequentialism from embarrassing implications. As I said, there is no obvious reason why this practice would erode the taboo against killing any more than capital punishment has. On the contrary, capital punishment seems senseless, and this practice might seem humane. We must do better. Other philosophers say that it is always wrong to aim at someone’s death, no matter what the gain. That explains our reactions to the transplant and trolley examples, they say, and also explains why a spare-parts lottery would be wrong: it would mean people one day aiming at someone’s death. But that explanation simply restates the problem. If someone’s motives are good—to save as many people as possible—why should it matter whether he actually aims at the death of a smaller number or simply knowingly produces their death?

The principle of double effect, as it is commonly understood, offers no answer by itself. It makes intention relevant without saying why. However, I believe that the second principle of dignity, which insists that decisions about the best use of someone’s life must be left to him, shows how and why intentional assumptions are important in these contexts.➉ (Thomas Scanlon, on the contrary, argues against the relevance of intention in double-effect cases and offers an alternative explanation of those cases.⑪) Sometimes I suffer harm only because I am in the wrong place at the wrong time; I stand in the way of others achieving their aims. Competition harm is typically like that; I am harmed because my small grocery store is in the town chosen by a supermarket chain. But in other circumstances I would suffer because others have usurped a decision that dignity requires me to make for myself—the decision what use is to be made of my body or my life. I suffer that indignity when, fat, I am thrown onto a track to save the lives of others.

My dignity is at stake in the latter, though not the former, case. That explains not only the double-effect distinctions we make but a variety of other familiar convictions. Even those who think it would be immoral for a doctor to help someone commit suicide also think that it would be wrong for doctors forcibly to insert lifesaving equipment into his body against his will. Even Felix Frankfurter was “shocked” by police forcing a stomach pump down a suspect’s throat to obtain evidence; the Supreme Court declared that unconstitutional.⑫ People have a right, in all these cases, that nothing be done to them that supposes that they are not the final judges of how their bodies are best used.

The second principle does not forbid any act, like choosing a patient for a liver transplant, that saves one life and dooms another. Or any act, like diverting a trolley, that puts a life in peril that was formerly safe. It forbids such acts only when they are based on a usurping judgment that the best use of one person’s body is to save another’s life. The difference explains the morality and law of unintended harm that we discussed a moment ago. You are entitled to drive with normal care in my street, even though driving there even with normal care increases the risk to my children. But you are not entitled to kidnap my children even for an hour to induce me to give more to Oxfam. In some circumstances warring nations are entitled to bomb enemy munitions factories, knowing that innocent civilians will be blown apart. But they are not entitled to bomb some civilians to terrify others into pressing for surrender. Aiming at death is worse than just knowingly causing it, because aiming at death is a crime against dignity.

The double-effect examples elicit the convictions they do through that distinction. Just as I may act in a way that causes or risks harm to you, entirely for my own benefit, so I may act in a way that causes or risks harm to you for the benefit of others, again provided that my justification does not suppose my right to decide what it is desirable should happen to you. If two of us need a transplant but there is only one liver available, or if two of us are drowning and there is only one rescuer, then it is only a matter of chance—that someone else in the neighborhood happens to need help as well—that the loser will die. No one has determined that in all the circumstances it is more desirable that he should die than live, that in these circumstances that is what should be done with or to his body. It would suit the rescuer’s purposes perfectly if the loser were not where he is, if he were in a position of greater safety.

But cases in which a dying person can be saved only by actually killing someone else are different: in those circumstances the rescuer who takes that step has formed and acts on a certain conviction. He has decided that the heart patient with only weeks to live should die at once in order that someone younger live. The heart patient may of course make that decision on his own: he may insist that he not be resuscitated the next time this is necessary—or even, if the law permits, that he be killed at once—so that his organs can be used to save another person. Then he would be deciding that the best use of his life would be to save someone else’s. We might applaud his decision. Or we might not: we might think that a life ends badly if it ends sooner than it might, and that it would be better for the transplant patient to die young naturally than for the old man to take or surrender his own life in that way.⑬ But however we think that decision should be made, the decision falls squarely within the patient’s own responsibility, a responsibility no one else is permitted to steal, even to bring about an overall better result. That is the consequence, once again, of our convictions about the scope of human dignity.

Crazy Cases Again

I concede that a great artificiality still hangs over these examples. Can the distinction between competition harm and deliberate harm really have so much force, when people will die however we classify the case? Yes. Philosophers can invent examples that make any principle or distinction seem arbitrary. When such examples are properly used, they test principles the way hypothetical cases test proposed legal doctrine. As I said in Chapter 12, it is no objection to a principle that the result it requires in a bizarre invented case does not strike us as immediately or evidently right. Or because, even when it does, it can be made to seem arbitrary. It is enough, given our interpretive ambitions, that we are not confident, after reflection, that it is wrong. The principles of dignity—including the principle that people must have sovereign control over the use made of their bodies—are not compelling because they deliver what seems the intuitively right verdict in crazy trolley cases. It is the other way around: the verdict they deliver in those cases seems intuitively right, even though in some respects odd, because these principles are compelling in ordinary social and political life. They help to integrate ethics and morality there. We test them in silly invented cases, and they pass the test: they do not deliver verdicts we must believe wrong. Most philosophy students do, apparently, think it right, or in any case not wrong, to throw the switch, dooming a single victim to save five others, but not to throw the fat passerby onto the track.

True, philosophers who are expert in trolley problems have invented variations that do not attract a similar consensus.⑭ Suppose, again, that five people are tied on the trolley track and that the trolley can be diverted to a second track on which a single person is tied. In this variation, the second track loops around to join the first in a circle, and the unlucky five are tied at that circle’s exact midpoint. So in this case the death of the single person tied on the second track is a necessary means to saving the five people; if the single person were not there, stopping the trolley, it would kill the five people anyway and just as quickly, though from the other direction. So diverting the trolley might—or might not—be thought to assume a judgment about the best use of the single person’s life. Students’ reactions seem to depend on whether they see the proposed switch as one away from five people or toward a buffer person. Perhaps it makes a difference whether the simpler trolley case is presented first and then the even more bizarre loop case, or the other way around. In any case, however, neither reaction would be so evidently wrong as to disqualify the distinction because it fails in this hyperartificial case.

What about the ex ante argument for a spare-parts lottery? Of course, my earlier suggestion—that it is permissible to kill you to harvest your organs because it would have been in your interests to join a lottery scheme if one had been established—is mistaken. A hypothetical contract is not a contract. But what if there was a lottery and you did join it? You sold yourself into a kind of slavery. Imagine your number is called and surgeons advance on you. You might think then that as you could have benefited from the scheme, it is only fair that you now be killed in its name. You might think it your duty to submit. But you might not: you might then think the fate too horrible or the arrangement unjust after all, or simply that your wish not to die trumps everything else. No matter: the decision is no longer yours. You have consented to an arrangement under which you no longer have the minimum control over what use is made of your body that is essential to your dignity. That is why we must not sell ourselves into slavery, even for our own good—we might have longer lives, but we live in indignity. Volunteering for danger—volunteering for the army, for instance—is different. Volunteers have made their own decision that the best use of their lives includes a heightened risk of danger. But they have not granted anyone the authority, as distinct from the power, deliberately to take their lives.

Letting Nature Take Its Course

One difference between the two-drowning-swimmers case of the last chapter and the initial trolley case of this one might seem pertinent, but is not. In the drowning case both swimmers will die if the rescuer does nothing—if, as we might be tempted to put it, he lets nature take its course. But in the initial trolley case a sole person on the second track will not be harmed if the agent does nothing: in throwing the switch he places him in new danger. Should the agent let nature take its course in this bizarre case? Should we not say that an agent’s decision to intervene in itself abrogates someone else’s responsibility for his own life? That the agent should simply have walked away?

It is unclear what it means to let nature to take its course. If it is natural to try to rescue five people at the cost of one, then throwing the switch is letting nature take its course. But perhaps “nature” means nonintelligent nature, so that a potential rescuer lets nature take its course by pretending that he is not there. But why should he? Suppose you and I, shipwrecked, are equidistant from a bobbing life jacket. We do not let nature takes its course, which would mean both drowning. We race for the life jacket. If I lose, it is the presence of a rescuer trying to save another person—you trying to save yourself—that leads to my death. Why does it matter if your rescuer is not you but a third party who is a better swimmer—your wife?—tossing you the jacket instead of me? The harm I suffer then is only competition harm—only my bad luck. But if your wife shoots me so that you will get to the life jacket first, then this is not just bad luck. She has usurped my right to decide whether my life should end immediately.⑮

Criminal punishment usurps that right as well. Prison is a dramatic violation of dignity because, as I said, control over what happens to my body is a particularly important part of personal responsibility. Capital punishment is the most dramatic violation of all. We all think jail sentences sometimes necessary, and some of us think that capital punishment is as well. But we all insist that no one be punished who has not acted badly and so forfeited the rights his dignity would otherwise demand. We insist, moreover, that it is better that many guilty people go free than that one innocent person be punished, and in that judgment, too, we confirm the importance of the distinction between bad luck and the choice of others about how our lives should be used.

===============================================================================

➀ Indeed, our assignment responsibility requires more than this minimum. You must have substantial control over what your body does—where you can take it and what you can use it to do—as well. That further control responsibility must be limited, however, to protect the control responsibility of others over their lives: you must not have control responsibility that would include damaging me or my property, for instance. So the criminal and tort law of any morally sensitive community will require fine judgments. But the most basic level of control responsibility, over what happens to your body, does not need to be limited and has therefore been treated as a necessary condition of dignity.

➁ See Ronald Dworkin et al., “Assisted Suicide: The Philosophers’ Brief,” New York Review of Books, March 27, 1997, 41–47.

➂ Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702 (1997).

➃ The T.J. Hooper, 60 F.2d 737 (2d Cir. 1932).

➄ An earlier draft of this sentence wrongly suggested that the required standard of due care is relative to the agent’s ambitions rather than his opportunities and resources. A standard so relative would have ridiculous consequences. I meant, and have revised the paragraph to make plainer, what I said in Law’s Empire (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1986), 301ff . I am grateful to John Goldberg and Kenneth W. Simons for bringing this to my attention. See Goldberg, “Liberal Responsibility: A Comment on Justice for Hedgehogs,” 677, and Simons, “Dworkin’s Two Principles of Dignity: An Unsatisfactory Nonconsequentialist Account of Interpersonal Moral Duties,” 715, both in Symposium: Justice for Hedgehogs: A Conference on Ronald Dworkin’s Forthcoming Book (special issue), Boston University Law Review 90, no. 2 (April 2010).

➅ For an illuminating elaboration, see Mark Geistner, “The Field of Torts in Law’s Empire,” Inaugural Lecture of the Sheila Lubetsky Birnbaum Professorship of Civil Litigation, NYU Law News website, www.law.nyu.edu/news/geistfeld_birnbaum_lecture.

➆ This is a simplified presentation of a very complex set of theories. Frances Kamm offers all you might wish of the complexity. See, e.g., Kamm, “The Doctrine of Triple Effect and Why a Rational Agent Need Not Intend the Means to His End,” in Intricate Ethics: Rights, Responsibilities, and Permissible Harm (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), 91–129.

➇ Judith Thompson, “The Trolley Problem,” Yale Law Journal 94 (1985): 1395–1415; Frances Kamm, “The Trolley Problem,” in Morality, Mortality, vol. 2: Rights, Duties, and Status (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001), 143–72.

➈ John Harris, “The Survival Lottery,” Philosophy 49 (1974): 81–87.

➉ See the discussion of that principle, and that consequence, in Chapter 9.

⑪ Scanlon argues for a distinction between the deliberative question of what an agent should do and the critical question whether the agent reflected in the right way on the deliberative question. See T. M. Scanlon, Moral Dimensions: Permissibility, Meaning, Blame (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2008), chapter 1, “The Illusory Appeal of Double Effect.” Whether a military leader aims to kill enemy noncombatants in a bombing raid or only knows that the raid will kill them is relevant to the critical question, Scanlon believes, but not to the deliberative question of permissibility unless the difference affects the number of noncombatants actually killed. But if the bombing would bring the war to an end sooner, thereby saving many more thousands of civilian lives on both sides, why is it justified only when it also has immediate military advantage? Scanlon sets out a principle to distinguish the cases (28), but this seems only to restate that requirement and not to explain it. I try to provide a justification in the text. This does not rely on motive in the way Scanlon finds objectionable. It does not ask a commanding general to identify what he most hopes to achieve by his raid. It asks whether his decision can be justified without assuming that this is the best use of the lives of the civilians he will kill. In some very different kinds of cases, however, motive does seem relevant to permissibility as well as to criticism. It would be permissible for a landlord to deny an apartment to a black pianist only if and because he objected to his all-night practicing rather than his race.

⑫ Rochin v. California, 342 U.S. 165 (1952).

⑬ For a discussion of this important ethical issue, see my book Life’s Dominion (New York: Knopf, 1993).

⑭ Thompson, “The Trolley Problem.”

⑮ The distinction between bad luck and usurpation is relevant in other contexts as well. See my Sovereign Virtue: The Theory and Practice of Equality (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000), chapter 13: “Playing God: Genes, Clones and Luck.”

===============================================================================

Key concepts:

assignment responsibility (288)

bare competition harm (287)

deliberate harm (287)

double effect, principle of (293)

harm, types of (288):
- competition harm
- deliberate harm

liability responsibility (290)

risk management (290)

risk transfer (290)

Questions:

But they are not entitled to bomb some civilians to terrify others into pressing for surrender. Aiming at death is worse than just knowingly causing it, because aiming at death is a crime against dignity. (296)
How about the atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki?