14 Obligations (300)

Convention and Obligation

We seek concrete interpretations of our two principles of dignity—that we must respect the equal importance of human lives, and that we have a special responsibility for our own lives—that allow us to live in the light of both without compromising either. In Chapters 12 and 13 we identified guides. We may swim mainly in our own lanes: we need not show strangers the concern we have for ourselves and those close to us. But we must not be indifferent to their fate. We owe them duties of aid when that aid is crucial, when we can give it with no great damage to our own ambitions, and, particularly, when we are directly confronted by suffering or danger. In these circumstances, to refuse our aid would show a contempt for other people’s lives that would deny self-respect as well. Our responsibility not to harm strangers is different and much greater. We may not deliberately injure someone else, even as a means to our own prosperity or survival. We have explored these moral injunctions—to aid and not to harm—in rough dimension. What they require and forbid in real circumstances is a matter for more refined judgment, and too much turns on detail for any more concrete rules to be set out in advance. Everything turns, case by case, on further and very often ineffable interpretive judgments. Politics, which comes later, is different.

So much for strangers. In this chapter we consider the ethical and moral challenge when those we might aid, at cost to ourselves, are not strangers but rather people in one or another kind of special relationship with us. These relationships fall into two main categories: performative and associational. First, we make some people special through datable and voluntary acts like making a promise to them. Second, some people just are special in virtue of some associational bond: a bond of family, kinship, or partnership in a joint enterprise, for instance. One associational relationship is particularly important: this is political association, and I set it aside for separate discussion later in the chapter.

Both performative and associational relationships give rise to what we call “duties” or “obligations”; these terms connote particularly strong responsibilities of aid. So we say that parents have a duty to care for their children, and colleagues to help one another professionally, and also that people who make promises are obliged to keep them. Philosophers and lawyers have given much attention to what they call the “nature” or “logic” of obligations and duties.➀ What is the difference, if any, between the claims that someone ought to help a suffering human being and that it is his duty to do so? What is the connection between obligations and rights? If you have an obligation to help me in some way, does it follow, automatically, that I have a right to your help? Can duties or obligations always be waived by those to whom they are owed? Some of these questions are interesting, but I shall not take them up here because they do not touch our main question, which is how the duties and obligations that are attached to your special relationships are drawn from and affect what it is for you to live well.

Both performative and associational obligations are dramatically affected by social facts. What counts as a promise or an excuse for ignoring that promise varies from context to context, place to place, and time to time. The variations are sharp and evident when performative acts change legal relations—through the laws of contract, marriage, or employment, for instance—but they are impressive even when only moral obligation is in play. The role obligations of a parent or child or colleague or citizen are also defined by contingent conventions. In some communities the duties of kinship are thought to extend to more distant degrees of relationship than in others, for example, and what parents are thought entitled to expect from their children in old age is fixed by what is customary in their social milieu. What business or professional colleagues expect from one another, as of right, depends on custom that might be very different from trade to trade or from profession to profession. In some cases obligations are fixed even more contingently by some form of election or vote. People are widely thought to have a moral obligation to obey almost any law their parliament happens to enact, for instance.

The crucial role of convention and social practice in fixing obligation poses a philosophical difficulty. Conventions are only matters of fact. How can they create and shape genuine moral duties? How can I be obliged to treat my second cousin like a brother if we live in one place but entitled to ignore him if we live in another? Why isn’t the difference just a matter of social anthropology that should cut no moral ice? How can the expression “I promise” gain moral force just because people take it to have moral force? Doesn’t Hume’s principle condemn the entire phenomenon of obligation as an enormous mistake? Yes, the moral responsibilities we discussed in the last two chapters do vary as facts vary. Whether you have a duty to try to rescue Hecuba depends on whether you can swim, have a lifeline, and so forth. But that is because a very general moral principle—the principle that governs duties of aid to strangers—makes them relevant. Social practices seem to create performative and associational obligations from scratch. They seem alchemy: making something moral out of nothing moral.

Philosophers have replied to this challenge by proposing other very general moral principles that might, like our general duty to help strangers in need, give contingent facts genuine moral force. They say that conventions give rise to expectations and that people have a moral right to have their expectations protected.➁ There is much in that claim, as we shall see, but it is incomplete. Not all expectations give rise to rights: we need to know why those generated by a particular vocabulary or role have special moral power. Other philosophers cite a general moral duty to respect useful and just social institutions.➂ But there are many useful and just institutions that I have no duty to respect—agricultural production arrangements among African tribes, for example—even though I could benefit them by respecting their production quotas and even if they expected me to respect them.

Still other philosophers say that general principles of fairness require me not to take advantage of social institutions without respecting the burdens of those institutions: not to be, as they put it, a free rider.➃ That principle could explain relatively few role obligations: parents may do nothing that gains them advantage from that role, and yet have moral as well as legal responsibilities associated with it. The free-riding principle might seem more apt in the case of promising, because people who make promises usually do seek to benefit from the institution. People often promise in order to extract benefits from those to whom the promise is given. But not always, and they still incur an obligation when they promise gratuitously.

Should we say that even a gratuitous promisor takes advantage of the institution of promising because that generally useful institution helps him on other occasions and, indeed, makes his gratuitous promise possible, whatever his purpose in making it? No, because there is no general moral principle that requires me to contribute to the cost of producing what benefits me: I may be selfish when I pass a street musician by without tossing him a bill, but I violate no obligation even if I have enjoyed his music—even if I have paused to hear more of it.➄ Of course promising is different: I do have an obligation when I promise because—well—I promised. But philosophers who appeal to a general principle of fairness to explain why promising creates obligations cannot count, as part of the reason why fairness requires keeping promises, that promises create obligations. We need a better account of the moral force of promises and role conventions. We can find it further back, in the two root principles of dignity whose implications we have been exploring for several chapters now.

Promises (303)

Mystery

Promises create obligations. That is accurate enough for ordinary purposes, particularly when there would have been no obligation but for a promise. But there is a danger in putting the matter that simply, a danger realized in much philosophical literature. It makes promising look like magic. Hume put the problem with characteristic bite.

  I shall further observe, that, since every new promise imposes a new obligation of morality on the person who promises, and since this new obligation arises from his will; it is one of the most mysterious and incomprehensible operations that can possibly be imagined, and may even be compared to transubstantiation or holy orders, where a certain form of words, along with a certain intention, changes entirely the nature of an external object, and even of a human creature.➅

Even when we put alchemy aside, we are likely to fear circularity. How can we explain why saying “I promise” creates a moral obligation without begging the question?➆ We are tempted to say: an obligation arises because the promisee—the person to whom the promise is made—will then rely on the promise and may be damaged if it is broken. But the promisee will not rely on the promise—it gives him no further reason to expect that the promise will be kept—unless he supposes that the promise creates an obligation. So we cannot appeal to the promisee’s reliance without already assuming that promises create obligations, which is what we are trying to explain.

These problems arise, however, only because so many philosophers think of promising as an independent, distinct ground of moral responsibility. Some believe it to be finally the sole ground of all duty: they believe we have the moral and political responsibilities we do because, in some mythic mode or dimension, we have agreed, and therefore promised, to follow the community’s moral conventions, which include the convention that we must keep our promises. That argument begs the question even more obviously and directly. We canvassed, just now, other arguments philosophers have offered to explain why we have at least a qualified duty to support standing moral conventions—a general duty to serve the greatest good, for instance, or to support just institutions, or not to ride free. These fail in general, for the reasons I offered, and they fail in particular to explain the moral force of promises.

We must kick the bad habit. Promising is not an independent source of a distinct kind of moral duty. Rather it plays an important but not exclusive role in fixing the scope of a more general responsibility: not to harm other people by first encouraging them to expect that we will act in a certain way and then not acting in that way. That general responsibility is itself a case of the even more general responsibility we are exploring throughout this Part Four: to respect the dignity of others and in that way to respect our own dignity. So we can study the detailed morality of promise-keeping as part of our interpretive project of deciding what our two principles of dignity require in practice. Once we see the question in that light, we can explain why promises create obligations without begging any question. We have a general responsibility not to harm other people, and this sometimes includes a responsibility to fulfill expectations that we have deliberately encouraged. This responsibility is particularly clear when we encourage the expectation through a promise, but only because promises clarify, through means fixed partly by convention, underlying responsibilities that would otherwise be muddy.

Encouragement and Responsibility

You cannot live without tempting or even encouraging others to make predictions about what you will do and to rely on those predictions in making their own plans. Governments, advertisers, rivals, family, lovers, friends, and opponents try to predict what you will do or want or buy or prefer. It would be impossible—a crippling compromise of your responsibility to live well—for you to avoid encouraging such expectations or to avoid defeating some of them. I may agree to attend some conference because I think you are coming, but you do me no wrong, even if you know this, by deciding not to attend after all. If we are friends, you should tell me, but that is all. But what if you have deliberately encouraged me to think you would attend the conference? You might have said: “I know this doesn’t look to be a riveting conference. But wouldn’t it be a good idea if we both went? We don’t get a chance much to talk, and this would be an excellent opportunity.” Then matters would be different. But how different?

If you were lying—you had no intention of attending—then you have harmed me just in that act. Dignity explains why: any lie (except in circumstances, like some games, in which lying is permissible) contradicts the second principle, because lying is an attempt to corrupt the base of information through which people exercise their responsibility for their own lives. You harm me when you lie to me even if your lie makes no further difference because I don’t believe you, or because your lie makes no difference to what I do, or because I suffer no further harm in acting on it. Your lie harms me because it insults my dignity even to try to corrupt my responsibility in that way. It harms you, too, because the insult to my dignity compromises the respect you should have for yourself.

Suppose, however, that you were perfectly sincere. You did intend to attend the conference when you encouraged me to join you there. But after I accepted and agreed to give a paper, you saw a list of the other speakers and realized that the conference would be worse than you thought: in fact mainly a waste of time. You should tell me that you have changed your mind, of course. But do you have any obligation actually to attend the boring meeting just because I have already accepted and must go? Now the question is different and more difficult. Do you violate your responsibility not to harm me if you fail to do what you encouraged me to think you would? We might break this into two questions. Have you harmed me? Did you have a responsibility not to harm me in that way?

You would plainly have harmed me if I would not have gone but for your encouragement and the conference was useless to me—the discussion of my paper uncritical and the rest boring. But suppose, on the contrary, that I would have gone anyway and that the conference was so exciting that I didn’t miss talking to you at all. Indeed, I wouldn’t have had time for you even if you had come. Have you harmed me then? Obviously not as badly. But at all? Yes, in two ways.

First, you created a risk of harm, and creating a risk is itself a kind of harm. You harmed me in the same way that it harms me when you drive carelessly in my street even if you miss me. When you decided not to come to the conference, after having encouraged me to think you would, you did not know—certainly not for certain—whether I would have gone anyway or whether I would find the conference profitable. Had we been in touch before you decided not to come, I might have assured you that you would do me no harm by not coming. Then you would not have harmed me. But if you acted in even partial ignorance of the impact that disappointing me would have, then you harmed me just by risking harming me in other ways. Second, you harmed me in something like the way you harm me when you lie. You changed the information base on which I made decisions and then—though this time only retrospectively—falsified that base. You corrupted, in two steps, the information base on which I made my decisions: first by encouraging me and then by falsifying your encouragement. You did not intend to mislead me when you suggested the conference, but you later deliberately made what you had said misleading. As in the case of lying, that is in itself a harm quite apart from whether it generates any further harm.

So we must consider the second question. Did you have a moral responsibility not to harm me either in the obvious way—if I had hated the conference—or in those more subtle ways? This was not mere competition harm that you plainly had no moral responsibility to avoid. You had singled me out for encouragement—crossed into my lane—in order to change my expectations and intentions. This act, just in itself, must have some moral consequence. You needed a reason of some sort to justify not doing what you encouraged me to think you would. Indifference or whimsy would not be good enough. But, as I said, it would be much too serious an invasion of your control over your own life to accept that changing your mind would always be wrong no matter what justification you had. We need a more lenient interpretation of what you owe me out of respect for my dignity. It is, however, a very difficult matter to determine where that more lenient line should be drawn.

This turns, in particular cases, on a great host of factors. How strenuously did you encourage me? How difficult would it be for you not to defeat that expectation? Were these difficulties wholly unexpected when you encouraged me? Or could they have been predicted? How likely was it, when you decided not to attend, that I would suffer in any of the obvious ways? Did I in fact suffer? We might disagree about that latter issue, either at the time or in retrospect. We might disagree, for instance, about whether in fact I profited from attending the conference. Whose opinion on that issue is relevant to the question of moral responsibility? Yours or mine?

That only scratches the surface. Many further factors are also relevant when we ask whether someone does wrong when he disappoints those he encouraged. Thomas Scanlon’s discussion of promising has greatly influenced contemporary discussions of the issue; my argument follows the same general strategy as his. (There are differences in our approaches.➇ ) He endorses the following “Principle F.”

  If (1) A voluntarily and intentionally leads B to expect that A will do X (unless B consents to A’s not doing so); (2) A knows that B wants to be assured of this; (3) A acts with the aim of providing this assurance, and has good reason to believe that he or she has done so; (4) B knows that A has the beliefs and intentions just described; (5) A intends for B to know this, and knows that B does know it; and (6) B knows that A has this knowledge and intent; then, in the absence of special justification, A must do X unless B consents to X’s not being done.➈

There are several matters of degree in this formal statement. How much assurance must A intend to provide, for instance? But it is at least plausible that Principle F is satisfied by the conference case I describe. Other commentators apparently disagree: Charles Fried, whose work on promising has also been very influential, imagines that I want to sell you a house next to a vacant lot, and, to encourage you, I tell you that I plan to build a house for myself on that lot and live there for the rest of my life.➉ But a few years later I change my mind and sell the still vacant lot to a gas station chain. Fried believes, on balance, that I break no duty to you when I sell, although Scanlon’s Principle F seems to argue otherwise.

Now consider a case in which the stakes are much higher than in the conference example. A young doctor starting in a small community is anxious to demonstrate his intention to remain there so as to acquire patients. He might, for instance, furnish and equip his surgery lavishly with that aim in view. After most local patients have shifted to the new doctor, and the only other doctor in the community has retired and moved away, the young doctor suddenly has a chance to join a teaching hospital with wonderful research facilities far away. What does he owe his new patients out of his responsibility not to harm them? What does his ethical responsibility to make something valuable of his own life require? These are difficult questions, because so many variables compete.

Many opinions seem reasonable. Scanlon’s principle would suggest that because the doctor did what he could to persuade people to give up their old doctor, he must not leave them stranded now. But Fried and others might reasonably think that this asks too much. People should understand that circumstances change, and that they necessarily run some risk when they rely on even deliberately cultivated predictions. They should have appreciated the possibility that a young and ambitious doctor might be tempted to leave and cannot now complain when he does. Much may turn, for most people, on further questions I have not so far listed. Suppose the young doctor has himself found someone to replace him. Would that extinguish any obligation he had to stay?

The Role of Promising

Such deep moral uncertainty would often be frustrating and crippling. Suppose I wanted you to help me plow my field tomorrow and I knew I could obtain your help only if you were convinced that I would then have an obligation to help you the following day. You would be reluctant if you thought there would be any serious question about my continuing moral responsibility to do that if my circumstances changed overnight. So I might try to eliminate all the grounds you might think I could have for not doing what I said I intended to do. I might drive to your farm every few hours to assure you, loudly, that I intended to help no matter what happened in my life. I would then have encouraged you so strenuously that my responsibility would be close to undeniable even if my circumstances did change. The level of excuse I would then need to escape responsibility would be much higher than if I had not encouraged you so fervently—and you know this. You would be much more confident, assuming you think me to be a morally responsible person, in your prediction that I would do as I tried to make you think I would.

Please notice that there is no circularity in this story.⑪ You do not assume that I will do what I predict because you assume I have an obligation because you assume that I will do what I predict. Your confidence is grounded in the more fundamental assumption we have just been exploring: that I can incur responsibility to you just by crossing into your lane to try to make you act differently. We both understand that it can be controversial whether someone does incur that kind of responsibility in any particular set of circumstances, and if so how strong the responsibility is. We know that in many cases people can reasonably disagree. So I undertake to make the case for my responsibility as strong as I can make it, to reassure you that my responsibility will be undeniable. I do that in my own interests: in order that you will plow my field tomorrow.

The conventions of promising provide me with a much more efficient device for doing the same thing. They provide a vocabulary through which someone can immediately ratchet up his encouragement to the level—whatever it would otherwise take—so that other factors that might in different circumstances argue against responsibility become close to irrelevant. The same conventions also provide a means to all but eliminate uncertainty in the opposite direction. “But I don’t promise” diminishes encouragement to such a low level that any justification of even minimum substance would be enough to avoid moral responsibility.

This is not magic. The conventions are parasitic on underlying and independent moral facts: that the degree of encouragement matters, that some very heightened levels of encouragement practically ensure responsibility, that some very diminished levels practically eliminate it. We might usefully compare the function of these promising conventions with that of the very different conventions of stylized insult. Convention has made certain words terms of grave abuse: these include what are known as racial or sexual slurs. The practices that attach special abuse to those phrases do not create new and distinct obligations. We normally do wrong to treat anyone with contempt; convention establishes these epithets as stylized and therefore efficient ways of showing that contempt. Promising is entirely different from stylized abuse, but it is similar in that both institutions clarify and refine nonconventional ways of harming people, and both therefore create new ways of breaching old duties.

No degree of encouragement can entirely eliminate the impact of other mitigating or damning factors, and so promising cannot do this either. There are circumstances in which no responsibility arises, in spite of a formal promise, because the promise was ill-judged or the promisor had a particularly urgent need to ignore it. And even “I don’t promise” does not permit someone who has deliberately encouraged an expectation to disregard it for no reason at all. Promising and explicit not-promising signal, by convention, limiting cases of a kind of moral responsibility, cases that would exist even in the absence of convention. The convention cannot achieve what the rationale of the underlying moral facts would not sanction.

Promises and Interpretation

Promises—or alleged promises—raise moral questions as well as settling them. A promise does not preempt the moral neighborhood. A bare promise without any background of responsibility or connection may be inert. I pick your name at random from a telephone book and write you thus: “I hereby promise you that next July I will walk from Land’s End to John O’Groats. Signed Yr. Obt. Servant Ronald.” Even in saner cases we may be uncertain whether someone has really promised, what he has promised, and whether he really has to keep his promises. Because promising is not a self-contained practice that generates obligations automatically, but is instead parasitic on the much more general duty not to harm others, these questions do not call for inspection of some special promising rule book. They ask for an interpretation of the practices of promising that locates those practices within the wider network of ethical and moral conviction.

We begin with what seems the essential core of any successful interpretation. The point of promising is to set the bar very high for successful excuses for disappointing deliberately encouraged expectations. A promise makes a whole range of excuses ineligible that would be sufficient if reliance had been encouraged in some other and less heightened way. It follows, I believe, that we must also set the bar high for counting some act or gesture as a promise: the burden lies on someone who claims rather than denies a promise, and genuine ambiguity counts against the putative beneficiary of the promise. (Contract law is a more complex matter.) But once a promise is assumed, we must test the excuses someone offers for breaking that promise against a standard as demanding as that we use to test excuses for undoubted harms—assault or deliberate damage to someone’s property, for instance.

In each of these cases, of course, as I said earlier, the level of excuse required is sensitive to the harm actually suffered as well as risked. Breaking a promise to dine is ordinarily not grave, but neither is a trivial assault or a token injury. But the fact that damage is negligible—or even that there is no damage at all—is not in itself an excuse. I am entitled that you keep a promise to dine even if one guest less doesn’t really matter, because in these circumstances it falls to me, not to you, to assess what to count as harm. Your having received a better invitation won’t do if I insist on your coming, even if you would be losing more than I gain. The manner of your intervention in my affairs raised the bar of excuse higher than that. But it could not have raised the bar so high that, for instance, your son’s illness would not excuse you. None of these near platitudes offers an algorithm for testing promises and their breach. We can only say that we must assign a high level of seriousness to promises—but not too high—when we draw our judgments about promise-keeping from, and integrate them with, our other and more general convictions about not harming people.

Associative Obligations (311)

Responsibility and Role

Why should the fact that everyone else in my community thinks that I have moral obligations to my children, parents, lovers, friends, colleagues, and fellow citizens mean that I do have those obligations? The answer lies, once again, in a creative interaction between our very general responsibility not to harm other people and the social practices that refine that responsibility. In some cases the mechanism of interaction is straightforward. Children need special care; if the community’s practices assign the responsibility for that care to a child’s parents, then no one else will supply it and his parents, just for that reason, have a duty to do so. In such cases, though conventions might have been different—in some kibbutzim they are—the fact that they have taken the shape they have accounts for the responsibilities they impose.⑫

But in other cases the alternative to assigning some people a special responsibility of care is not that others will be assigned that responsibility but that no one will. A community in which no one has special responsibilities to sexual partners or colleagues or in virtue of friendship, or in which children have no special responsibility to take care of parents, would seem impoverished to us, but no one else would be expected to pick up the special responsibilities we think these relationships bring. It is the internal character of these relationships, not the fact that some assignment of special responsibility is evidently needed, that drives the responsibilities that the community’s conventions recognize and shape. So we must find a justification of the role those conventions play.

The best justification, I believe, describes a repeated feedback loop between a special responsibility we have to people in certain relationships with us, just in the nature of the case, and a set of social practices that progressively reduces the uncertainties inherent in that kind of responsibility. The second principle of dignity requires that we assume a special responsibility for our own lives: among other consequences, it forbids what I described in Chapter 9 as subordination. In certain relationships we defer to the interests, opinions, authority, or well-being of others in a way that would count as subordination if it was not in some way a reciprocal deference. The deference takes different forms in different relationships, and the necessary reciprocation need not be in kind. But unless the parties to such a relationship both accept some kind or degree of special responsibility to one another, the dignity of the party denied that special concern is compromised.

In our political life, for example, we defer to the authority of others—a sovereign, a parliament, or our fellow citizens—when we accept that we have an obligation to do what they command even when we disagree with its fairness or wisdom. That kind of obligation lies at one end of a spectrum of intimacy; I discuss it separately later in the chapter. Sexual intimacy defines the other end of that spectrum: people who accept that they are lovers place themselves, body and soul, in each other’s hands. Political association, sexual intimacy, and other forms of association we discuss in this section are enormously valuable ethically. They contribute to both the goodness of our lives and our success in living our lives. But it is important to that benefit that they are risky relationships. They make each party not only open to a special kind of benefit but vulnerable to a special kind of harm. You do not deny or compromise your special responsibility for your own life if you have made the goodness of your own life vulnerable to what happens to a few others, or if you have granted them partial control over your own life, when these mergers of life and fate are matched by a like heightened concern for you. But, except in very special circumstances, a person’s responsibility is compromised when that merger is unilateral; when the other party to what you take to be a special relationship treats you as he would any stranger. The benefit you sought, just in the fact of a relationship you value, is then replaced not just by disappointment but also by a kind of subservience.

The special importance of a parent’s love for his children and their love for him, and the responsibilities that flow naturally from that love, redeems what would otherwise be slavery in both directions. Parents’ freedom to direct their own lives is dramatically compromised by the responsibility of parenthood; children’s subordination to their parents’ will is, for a time, almost complete. Dickens caught the moral implications of these facts in his invention of Mrs. Jellyby. She neglected her own children, who lived in chaotic squalor, in order to pursue her “telescopic philanthropy.” We do not count her as saintly for that choice; her show of greater concern for the poor of Africa made the total control she nevertheless exercised over her own family seem tyranny. She was ridiculous, not because she cared less for her children than for strangers, but because she did not care much more for them.

Other, less intense, relationships have their own internal logic. Partnership enterprises of various sorts, whether formal or informal, are deceitful if one partner lacks a commitment to the joint success of both. The special concern that partnership demands is of course much more limited than relationships to which love is central. I must show special concern for my fellow worker in his professional life but not for his life overall. Unless, of course, he is also my friend, because friendship is special in yet a different way. Seeking and finding pleasure in the continued company of another person need not imply love, but it would be meanly instrumental if it did not involve, as Aristotle put it, a concern for that person for his own sake that is greater than one’s concern for strangers. Displays of friendship would be another kind of indignity if they were not matched by a special and reciprocal concern.

I anticipate two contrary objections. My account may strike you as too moralized. You might prefer to emphasize the evolutionary importance and continuing benefits of the relationships I have in mind and therefore the instrumental value of the obligations that protect them. You might think it entirely natural, for instance, that lovers and parents and children should feel responsibility for one another. As throughout, however, we seek a justification for these obligations, not an explanation of their origin or subsistence. The natural, ubiquitous, and powerful emotional force of these relationships does indeed have justifying importance: it is because the relationships almost invariably carry a natural and powerful emotional force that indignity is palpable when that force is absent or bogus. But it is the harm inflicted by that indignity, not the evolutionary value of those emotions, that grounds the obligation not to inflict that special kind of harm.

You might, on the other hand, think my account ethically deflated. Decent people do not see themselves as obliged to care for their children or lovers or parents or friends: they just do care for them and act wholly instinctively out of that concern. If they were to pause to reflect on exactly what they owe, or on when their failure would compromise someone’s dignity, they would be guilty of the now-famous one thought too many. Once again, however, the objection misses the point. Perhaps decent people are never aware of their obligations to those close to them; perhaps they would resent the suggestion that a sense of obligation in any way explains their behavior. But they do have those obligations nevertheless, and from time to time they do sense their force: when they feel no desire, for instance, to endure a troublesome old parent. Their obligations do not disappear when they do ignore them, as the troublesome old parent may make plain when the occasion arises. So we must account for the obligations as well as the behavior of people who are never conscious, and never need to be reminded, of them.

Convention and Responsibility

We found a rough basis for role obligation in the general moral principles we identified in earlier chapters, principles that demand heightened concern in certain relationships, without relying yet on the moral force of convention. But the relationships that generate these obligations cannot appear except in society and therefore cannot be entirely innocent of the impact of convention. Even those relationships most dominated by biology carry cultural freight: identifying someone as a parent adds something to, and does not even assume, a biological fact, and what it adds differs to some degree from place to place, time to time. That fact does not make role obligation “only conventional.” The obligations are genuine because convention does not create but only focuses and shapes the more general principles and responsibilities it assumes.

First, the more detailed the conventions, the less room for uncertainty they leave as to what would count as the forbidden harm. It would be at best unclear, absent any conventional instruction, who counts as a member of my family to whom I owe special concern. Or what friendship permits or requires by way of favoritism in employment. Social practice reduces these areas of uncertainty; it does this differently in different cultures and also over time. Second, convention sharply increases the risk to dignity when these responsibilities, so refined, are ignored; it increases the risk by attaching a social, and not merely personal, meaning to any failure to respect the relationship. Because role conventions stipulate which acts are required or forbidden by a special relationship, they establish a vocabulary of behavior that either confirms or denies the mutual concern that a particular form of association presupposes. These two features establish the progressive feedback loop I mentioned.

The analogy I offered to other forms of social meaning, including racial slurs, is in point here as well. Just as a word that has been brought into the lexicon of hate cannot be freed from that meaning without elaborate scaffolding of explanation, so it is not possible to free a denial of help demanded by a role convention from the disrespect it signals without an equally elaborate and hazardous explanation. So convention strengthens as well as shapes role obligations. The expectations they nourish cannot be dismissed as mere predictions with no moral force, because they are supported not just by the practices themselves but by the more basic responsibilities the practices refine and protect. The obligation drives the expectation rather than the other way around, and the obligation does not cease when the expectation perishes—when parents become resigned to their children’s indifference, for instance.

Reciprocal interaction between background responsibility and social convention explains a further and crucial feature of these obligations. Role conventions do not impose genuine associative obligations automatically: the conventions must satisfy independent ethical and moral tests. Sexist or racist practices, or those that define honor among murderers, drug dealers, or thieves, impose no genuine obligation on those they purport to oblige, no matter how thoroughly adherents seem to accept those obligations. Mafia soldiers form expectations, they find the practices of their organization distinctly useful, they take advantage of those practices, and they regard any breach of loyalty by others as an indignity. They dangerously regard other soldiers as free riders when these shirk the burdens of the organization. But once we realize that role practices impose genuine obligations only because—and therefore only when—they allow their members more effectively to meet their standing ethical and moral responsibilities, then we also realize that these practices cannot impose obligations when they act as obstacles rather than means to that goal. Social practices create genuine obligations only when they respect the two principles of dignity: only when they are consistent with an equal appreciation of the importance of all human lives and only when they do not license the kind of harm to others that is forbidden by that assumption. They demand special treatment for certain people, but they cannot license hatred or murder.

Interpretation and Role

We have so far focused on how social practices and conventions impose actual obligations. The question which obligations they impose is of much greater practical importance. Role practices reduce the uncertainty people face in deciding what they owe people close to them, but they hardly eliminate that uncertainty. Even the most explicit of role conventions—those defining the duties of parents toward young children, for example—leave many questions unresolved. They do not settle, for instance, just as a matter of convention, the troubling question whether parents who can afford private education are permitted or required to use relatively poor state schooling instead. Many important role practices—the conventions of friendship, for instance—do little more than recognize a category calling for and justifying special treatment without any precise account of what that special treatment must or may entail. Who exactly is my friend? Where is the line to be drawn between friendship and acquaintance? Can I terminate an inconvenient friendship at will, just by so declaring? Or do friendships, once formed, have more staying power? If so, how and when do they end? What must I do for even a close friend? Help hide his crimes from the police?

These familiar questions roll on indefinitely, even about only one role practice. The traditional explanations of associative obligation I mentioned early in this chapter offer no help in answering them. We may accept a duty to bear the burdens as well as the benefits of a social practice, but that cannot help us decide what those burdens are. We may recognize a duty to support an existing institution that we believe useful, but that doesn’t help in deciding what that existing institution actually does require. We may commit ourselves to respect the expectations that a social practice generates, but that commitment does not help us choose between people’s expectations when these disagree. These purported justifications of role practices are unhelpful because they take the practices to be only matters of convention, and pure conventions are exhausted by the scope of consensus.

Once we recognize that role practices clarify genuine but indeterminate responsibilities that flow from the internal character of the relationships on which they build, we have a basis for interpreting them in the way we interpret anything else. The long discussion of interpretation in Chapters 7 and 8 is therefore pertinent here. In an earlier book I offered an example specifically tailored to the interpretation of conventional practices thought to impose obligations.⑬ We sometimes disagree, even within a single community, about what courtesy requires, particularly when old conventions of respect are eroding. We each form our opinions through mostly unreflective but nevertheless controversial assumptions about the practice’s underlying point.

When a friend asks you for financial help and you are reluctant, you do not ponder the underlying point of friendship to decide whether you must. But some reaction to his request will seem right to you because of your unstudied understanding of what friendship is and means, and your decision will solidify as well as give effect to that understanding and so govern your reaction to later and parallel questions about what you owe to friends. These are interpretive reactions. If we tried to reconstruct them in argumentative form, we would begin with some assumption about what form and degree of heightened concern friendship presumes and requires. You might well be unaware of having made any such assumption and, indeed, unaware that you were engaged in any process of reasoning at all. You might say that you just “saw” that this is what friendship does or does not require. But there was nothing for you to “see”: we can make sense of your reactions only by assuming that your experience has embedded an interpretive understanding of the concept that has become unreflective and instantly available.⑭ All that is simply to repeat the claims of our earlier discussions of interpretation and to apply them to the phenomenon of associative obligation.

Political Obligation (317)

Paradox

Legal and political philosophers debate whether people have a moral obligation to obey the laws of their community just because they are its laws—whether, that is, people have what is often called “political” obligation. This is not the question whether people have any reason to submit themselves to political authority. It is a philosophers’ parlor game to imagine that people might live in a “state of nature” under no scheme of governance and then to consider what reasons people in that situation would have to institute governments among themselves. The popularity of this exercise helps account for the popular but mistaken assumption that legitimacy depends on the unanimous consent of the governed and therefore on some fantastical history or fiction about that consent. In any case, that is not our question now. Familiar governments do exist, their boundaries and hence claims of dominion are the product of historical accident, and almost all of us are born or brought into one of them. Do we have an obligation to obey the laws of the state we happen to be born into?

Of course, we usually have an independent moral reason to do what the law requires and not to do what it proscribes. Laws condemn murder, and murder is wrong. But the question of political obligation arises when we have no other reason to do what the law requires. A law is adopted by officials I voted against, and I believe that law unwise in policy and wrong in principle. I probably have an important practical reason to obey this law; I may well be arrested or fined if I do not. But does the bare fact that this is the law give me a further, distinctly moral, reason to obey it? That is not to ask whether we are ever justified in disobeying a law. I can accept that I have a standing obligation, in principle, to obey the laws of my community and yet think that some particular law is so unjust or so brutally unwise that I am justified in disobeying it. That is the opinion of people who believe that civil disobedience—disobedience to protest unjust laws—is sometimes morally permitted and even required. For them, the moral permissibility of disobedience in these circumstances is an exception to a more general principle that requires obedience even to laws they disapprove but do not think wicked.

Some philosophers—they are called “anarchists,” though few of them have bombs or beards—deny that the bare fact that a law has been passed, even in a community whose structures and laws are generally just, can provide any independent moral reason for obeying that law.⑮ We have a duty to obey the law when some independent reason argues that we must: if the law improves social justice, for example, or if obeying it would make the community as a whole better off. But not, they insist, just because the law was adopted according to the constitutional procedures that the political practices and conventions of our community stipulate.

Anarchists often rely on a general philosophical thesis: they believe that no one has an obligation unless he has voluntarily accepted that obligation. They are right to think that political obligation is not voluntary, except in the relatively rare cases of naturalization. The once popular idea that people voluntarily accept an obligation to obey the laws of their community when they do not leave that community is too silly any longer to take seriously. Political philosophers have tested many other ways of defending the idea that political obligation depends on consent. But these have all failed, and they are anyway unnecessary because the popular assumption that obligations are genuine only if voluntary is itself untenable. The moral responsibilities we studied in the last two chapters are not voluntary: I have no choice whether I must rescue someone drowning in front of me when I can do so easily. Some of the associational obligations discussed earlier in this chapter are also involuntary—children have no choice in selecting parents—and most of the others are only partly voluntary: most friendships, for instance, arise casually, and we each have friends we had no conscious intention of making friends. Philosophers who assume that only voluntary obligations can be genuine contradict themselves, moreover, because they must assume that the obligation to keep a promise or respect an oath is genuine even though that obligation was itself never accepted. An involuntary obligation lies behind any voluntary one.

But that is not a positive argument for political obligation: it only denies that anarchists can win their case quickly by appeal to some general principle about obligation and consent. They are right to reject many positive arguments that have been suggested. You do not have a moral obligation to obey the law of your community just because others expect you to obey. Or because, since you have taken advantage of the benefits of political association, you have an obligation to accept the burdens. If people do have political obligations—if the anarchists are wrong—then this must be a special case of associational obligation. We must have political obligations because we are related to our fellow citizens in some special way that gives each of us special responsibilities to the others independently of any consent.

It might seem problematic that we could have that kind of special relations with all fellow citizens, however. We know our parents, children, lovers, and friends intimately, and we have at least a personal acquaintance with colleagues and even neighbors. But that is not true of fellow citizens of anything larger than a tiny community: many Americans have denser personal relations with foreigners than with all but a few fellow citizens. It may therefore seem mysterious what associational obligations could hold among people just because they salute—if they do salute—the same flag. We will not find the answer in any history of how political communities came to be formed or reformed. It is only a series of historical and geographical accidents—where rivers run and kings slept—that has made the political boundaries of the United States or France or any other place what they are. We must seek the moral force of fellow citizenship not in anything that preceded these accidental political groupings or explains them historically, but rather in the contemporary consequences of these accidents.

Political obligation flows from political association in the same way as the other associative obligations we just reviewed flow from other kinds of association. Coercive political organizations undermine the dignity of their members unless each accepts a reciprocal responsibility to the others to respect collective decisions, provided that these decisions meet appropriate conditions. We begin explaining why by noticing the paradox of civil society. Collective coercive government is essential to our dignity. We need the order and efficiencies that only coercive government can provide to make it possible for us to create good lives and to live well. Anarchy would mean the end of dignity altogether. But coercive government also threatens to make dignity impossible. Some members of the community must exercise vast power over the rest: they must threaten punishment for disobedience, and they must sometimes carry out the threat.

That state of affairs threatens both of our principles. How can I, given my special responsibility for my own life, accept the dominion of others? How can I, given my respect for the objective importance of other people’s lives, join in forcing them to do as I wish? Everyone who is not a dictator faces the first of these challenges. A great many people—in a genuine democracy, almost all adults—face the second as well, and it is equally sharp. We may not deliberately harm even strangers for our own advantage. That applies to collective action as well as individual acts: if I combined with allies to imprison someone or steal his property, I would show the same contempt for our victim and therefore for myself as if I acted alone. Democratic politics raises the possibility that we all harm each other in that way every day.

The challenge the paradox poses is, once again, interpretive. We must develop our conception of what dignity requires further than we yet have, so that we can identify a politics that is consistent with it. We have already accepted that the second principle of dignity—that we must take responsibility for our own lives—permits us, under certain conditions, to share that responsibility with others. We considered examples earlier: relationships of intimacy, for instance, that are supported by mutual heightened concern. Political association is another example. We find ourselves in associations we need and cannot avoid but whose vulnerabilities are consistent with our self-respect only if they are reciprocal—only if they include the responsibility of each, at least in principle, to accept collective decisions as obligations. If we did not have that obligation, and supposed ourselves morally free to disregard those decisions whenever we wished and safely could, then we would have to concede a like moral freedom to everyone in the community. Our state would then be a tyranny that forced people to do what they had no obligation to do. We would abandon our dignity whenever we bowed to the community’s threats and also whenever we joined in creating or enforcing those threats against others. It is an important part of our own ethical responsibility, and therefore part of our moral responsibility to others, that we accept for ourselves and require of them the particular associative obligation—political obligation—that we are now considering.

Political obligation is in one way more precisely defined than the other associative obligations we have been canvassing. What it requires is fixed by constitutional structure and history: by the processes of legislation and, in some cases, adjudication as well. But in another way its moral impact is often more contestable. It is debatable when civil disobedience is an appropriate response to a citizen’s more general obligation to help improve his community’s sense of what its members’ dignity requires. In some terrible circumstances it is arguable that political obligation has lapsed entirely: when a government in power is no longer a legitimate government. No associative obligation holds when the purported association is itself a force for bad: the Mafia, as I said, creates no obligations among its members. Political obligation is a more complex matter, because laws are so different and have such different point and consequence from one another. But political obligation may also be extinguished altogether. Revolution rather than disobedience is then in the cards.

Legitimacy

Political obligation holds, I said, only under certain conditions. The government of a political community is legitimate, let us say, when it meets those conditions. Legitimacy therefore has two dimensions: it depends on both how a purported government has acquired its power and how it uses that power. I discuss the acquisition dimension in Chapter 18 and the exercise dimension first here and then throughout Part Five.

Legitimacy is a different matter from justice. Governments have a sovereign responsibility to treat each person in their power with equal concern and respect. They achieve justice to the extent they succeed. But it is controversial what success means: nations, political parties, and political philosophers disagree about justice. This book sets out, in Part Five, one among many controversial theories. Governments may be legitimate, however—their citizens may have, in principle, an obligation to obey their laws—even though they are not fully, or even largely, just. They can be legitimate if their laws and policies can nevertheless reasonably be interpreted as recognizing that the fate of each citizen is of equal importance and that each has a responsibility to create his own life. A government can be legitimate, that is, if it strives for its citizens’ full dignity even if it follows a defective conception of what that requires.

Evaluating legitimacy therefore requires a distinct interpretive judgment that will often be difficult. Do we make better sense of some piece of injustice by taking it to express a flawed understanding of what equal concern and respect requires? Or rather as an outright rejection of that responsibility? Naked tyrannies—Nazi Germany and Stalin’s Soviet Union—fall plainly into the second hole, but states less openly unjust present harder cases. The interpretive judgment must be sensitive to time and place: it must take into account prevailing ideas within the political community. When it was near-universally accepted that everyone’s fate is better protected, and his dignity better expressed, when he is governed by royal or ecclesiastical appointees of a god and when a state religion is established as canonical, the interpretive case for the legitimacy of a genuine monarchy or theocracy was stronger than it now is. In any case, the interpretive judgment must take into account the full range of a government’s laws and practices. Does the monarchy in fact work for the good of everyone it purports to govern, or only for some privileged group or to perpetuate and expand its own power? Does the theocracy try to convert dissenters only by persuasion? Or does it punish them for their opinions and coerce their conversion? It may be impossible to sustain some government’s trumpeted claim to equal concern when the policies it hopes to defend are placed in a larger context.

Justice is, of course, a matter of degree. No state is fully just, but several satisfy reasonably well most of the conditions I defend in Part Five. Is legitimacy also a matter of degree? Yes, because though a state’s laws and policies may in the main show a good-faith attempt to protect citizens’ dignity, according to some good-faith understanding of what that means, it may be impossible to reconcile some discrete laws and policies with that understanding. A state may have an established democracy, provide for free speech and press, offer constitutional tests through judicial review, and provide adequate police service and an economic system that enables most of its citizens to choose their own lives and prosper reasonably. Yet it might pursue other policies that cannot be understood other than as a flat denial of the principles on which that attractive general structure is based. It may exclude some particular minority—of race or economic class—from benefits its policies assume to be requisite for others. Or it may adopt coercive laws that threaten liberty in misperceived emergencies or to enforce some cultural imperative: to improve the sexual ethics of the community, for example. These particular policies may stain the state’s legitimacy without destroying it altogether. Its legitimacy then becomes a matter of degree: how deep or dark is that stain? If it is contained, and political processes of correction are available, then citizens can protect their dignity—avoid becoming tyrants themselves—by refusing so far as possible to be party to the injustice, working in politics to erase it, and contesting it through civil disobedience when this is appropriate. The state remains legitimate, and they retain political obligation, to a degree that may be substantial. If the stain is dark and very widespread, however, and if it is protected from cleansing through politics, then political obligation lapses entirely. The unfortunate citizens must contemplate, as I said, not just civil disobedience but revolution.⑯

Tribal Obligations? (323)

We have been discussing obligation that arises from the special facts, powers, and vulnerabilities of human association. Many, perhaps most, people cherish other special relationships beyond those I discussed: these center largely on relationships that are in different ways cultural and historical rather than biological, social, or political. American Jews very often feel a special concern for other Jews: they give particularly to charities that benefit Jews, for instance, or work for causes they think, in the conventional phrase, good for their people. Blacks, ethnic Poles across the world, people who speak the same language whether across national political boundaries or within multilingual states, often feel a similar tug to favor other members of that group in some way. They sometimes, in some circumstances, speak of a right of such groups to something they call self-determination.

I recognized in Chapter 9 that many people treat these relationships as parameters in their decisions how to live. For some people they are crucial parameters: they think it essential to identify themselves with some group and to live in a manner that expresses that identification. They may be right. I am anxious now only to deny that these are matters of associational obligation. My argument for that kind of obligation fixed on standing ethical and moral features of our relationships with others: relationships that for different reasons threaten indignity if they are not structured by some special and shared concern. Political association is among these because coercive government destroys dignity without partnership. But the different popular forms of tribal association have no such features.

Many people do believe, as I do not, that their racial, ethnic, religious, and linguistic connections bestow associational rights and obligations. Perhaps some of these convictions have a genetic foundation; if so they will prove particularly hard to ignore and perhaps pointless to disparage. But the idea of these special rights and obligations has been and remains a powerful source of evil. Throw a dart at a spinning globe, and the odds are good that it will land where tribes of race, religion, or language are killing each other and destroying their communities in the name of some supposed group right or destiny. These hatreds may be as enduring as they are destructive, and we should have no illusions that they will disappear or even ebb from human affairs. But I insist that nothing in the argument of this chapter lends them any moral or ethical support.

===============================================================================

➀ The classic discussion is Wesley Hohfeld, Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in Judicial Reasoning, ed. W. W. Cooke (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1919).

➁ See David Lewis, Convention (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1969).

➂ John Rawls suggests that the duty of justice, which requires us to support and comply with just institutions, is a natural duty. (Rawls, A Theory of Justice [Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1971], 115, 334.)

➃ Ibid. 342–43. Rawls refers to H. L. A. Hart, “Are There Any Natural Rights?” Philosophical Review 64 (1955): 185–86.

➄ Robert Nozick, Anarchy, State, and Utopia (New York: Basic Books, 1974), 93–95.

➅ David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature, 3.2.5–14/15–524.

➆ G. E. M. Anscombe, “Rules, Rights, and Promises,” in her Ethics, Religion, and Politics: Collected Philosophical Papers (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1981), 97–103.

➇ Scanlon suggests that a promise is best understood as a conventional means of acknowledging that the requirements of his Principle F are satisfied in the circumstances. I believe that understates the function and importance of the institution. The various clauses of Principle F can be satisfied to different degrees, and it may therefore be controversial whether its conditions are sufficiently satisfied to engage moral responsibility in any particular case. That is particularly true of the requirement that A “lead” B to form certain beliefs. If you had called me several times urging me to go to the conference I described so that we could talk, the reassurance I would think I have been given would be greater than if you had mentioned the matter more casually, and the difference would then be pertinent not only to whether you had acquired some prima facie moral responsibility toward me but the strength of that responsibility—whether some conflicting and more important invitation you subsequently received would provide an adequate excuse for skipping the conference. A promise serves its function by declaring that the encouragement offered is at the highest level of intensity and is sufficiently intense to put the bar very much lower for the other conditions.

Some of Principle F’s clauses need not necessarily be satisfied to any degree in order that an obligation be created, moreover. As I suggest below in this note, A may acquire an obligation even if B does not actually expect A to do as he says. Satisfying other clauses may not be necessary either; it might be debated, for instance, whether A must know that B wants reassurance—it may be enough that A strongly wants to reassure him and that B knows that even if B doesn’t particularly want reassurance. We should therefore say that, absent an explicit promise or promise denial, the general situations that Principle F contemplates are morally fluid. Much depends on circumstance, and reasonable people can disagree in many circumstances. For the reasons and in the way described in the text, an explicit promise or promise denial makes the situation markedly less fluid.

Scanlon finds the following difficulty in his own formulation of Principle F. Suppose A promises to help B plow B’s fields tomorrow. According to the first step in Principle F, A incurs an obligation only if he succeeds in convincing B that he will help plow B’s field. However A cannot convince B of that unless B comes to think that A will have a reason to plow. In some circumstances the only reason B might sensibly suppose A to have (after B has finished helping A plow A’s field) is the obligation he supposes that A incurred through his promise. So the argument for an obligation cannot get started: its first step presupposes its conclusion. (This is a version of the circularity problem I mentioned at the outset of the text discussion.) Scanlon hopes to solve this problem by appealing to a further principle that forbids A to promise unless he reasonably believes that he will perform. B is entitled to believe that A respects that principle as well and therefore to think that A will perform without relying on any assumption that A has incurred an obligation. Once B has formed that belief, the conditions of Principle F are satisfied and A does have that obligation (Scanlon, What We Owe to Each Other [Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2000], 308). Critics reasonably comment that B should not conclude from the fact that A has a reasonable belief that he will perform when he makes the promise that he will have a reason to perform at a later time. See, e.g., Niko Kolodny and R. Jay Wallace, “Promises and Practices Revisited,” Philosophy & Public Affairs 31, no. 2 (2003): 119. The first step in Scanlon’s principle F is too strong. It is not necessary that A convince B that he will keep his promise or respect some other form of assurance in order for A to incur an obligation. A has an obligation if he promises and other conditions are met, even if B thinks it possible or even likely that A will renege. B must have had some reason to make the bargain in that case, of course, but, with some effort, we can imagine one. He might have wanted an occasion to display A’s bad character to the world, for instance. Or he may have wanted generously to help A plow A’s field without acknowledging that he does not trust A’s word. Or he might himself doubt that A has an obligation—perhaps B thinks that A is unaware that B’s field is much harder to plow. B might think that A has no obligation for that reason but hope that A will think he does. In all these cases A may still have an obligation to plow B’s field tomorrow, whether or not B expects A to plow it or thinks that A does have that obligation.

➈ Scanlon, What We Owe to Each Other, 304.

➉ Charles Fried, Contract as Promise: A Theory of Contractual Obligation (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1982), chapter 2, 9.

⑪ My colleagues Kevin Davis and Liam Murphy have generously pressed me on this issue.
 
⑫ Thomas Scanlon reminded me of this practical argument for some role obligations.

⑬ Ronald Dworkin, Law’s Empire (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1986), 68–73.

⑭ Richard Fallon raises questions about this discussion. See Richard H. Fallon Jr., “Is Moral Reasoning Conceptual Interpretation?” in Symposium: Justice for Hedgehogs: A Conference on Ronald Dworkin’s Forthcoming Book (special issue), Boston University Law Review 90, no. 2 (April 2010) (hereafter BU): 535.

⑮ Robert Paul Wolff, In Defense of Anarchism (New York: Harper and Row, 1970).

⑯ I am indebted to Susanne Sreedhar and Candice Delmas for persuading me of the importance of the question whether legitimacy is a matter of degree (Sreedhar and Delmas, “State Legitimacy and Political Obligation in Justice for Hedgehogs: The Radical Potential of Dworkinian Dignity,” BU: 737). Much of this paragraph is a response to them.

===============================================================================

Key concepts:

convention does not create but only focuses and shapes the more general principles and responsibilities it assumes (314)
- the more detailed the conventions, the less room for uncertainty they leave as to what would count as the forbidden harm
- convention sharply increases the risk to dignity when these responsibilities, so refined, are ignored

encouragement (304)

interpretation (316)

lying (305)

obligation and social facts (301)

paradox of civil society (320)
- collective coercive government is essential to our dignity
- coercive government also threatens to make dignity impossible

promises create obligations (303)
- a convention
- provide vocabulary
- eliminate uncertainty

relationship (301)
- performative
- associational (311)