15 Political Rights and Concepts (327)

Rights

Rights and Trumps

The final discussion of Chapter 14, about political obligation and legitimacy, turned an important corner. Parts One and Two of this book discussed the possibility and character of truth in morality, ethics, and other departments of value. Parts Three and Four discussed the central concepts of ethics, captured in the two principles of dignity, and then the central concepts of personal morality—our duties to aid others and not to harm them, and the special duties we have in virtue of performative acts like promising or relationships like friendship. Political obligation belongs to this last topic because it springs from a relationship that holds among fellow subjects of a political community. But it marks the transition from the personal to the political, because citizens acquit their political obligations in part through a separate, artificial collective entity. Political communities are only collections of individuals, but some of these individuals have special roles and powers that allow them to act, singly or together, on behalf of the community as a whole. So we must recognize a distinct department of value: political morality. Ethics studies how people best manage their responsibility to live well, and personal morality what each as an individual owes other people. Political morality, in contrast, studies what we all together owe others as individuals when we act in and on behalf of that artificial collective person.

The shift of topic from personal to political morality allows a shift in style as well. I have written little about personal morality before, and so the last several chapters were necessarily expository and somewhat detailed. In contrast, I have written a good deal about political morality, particularly in my books Life’s Dominion, Sovereign Virtue, and Is Democracy Possible Here? so the remaining chapters can be more summary. I ask you to treat those books as incorporated into this one by reference, and I direct you to particular portions of those books that amplify arguments summarized here. I aim to redeem the suggestion of the first pages of Chapter 1 by showing how the other parts of this book converge on political morality, just as each of them, together with political morality, can be seen to converge on any of them singly. I try to weave political morality into the overall interpretive structure. There is a good deal of new wine in what follows. But there is old wine as well, and then the point, as I said much earlier, is its new bottles.

We studied ethics and personal morality through the concept of responsibility—what people must do for their own sake or for others—rather than the often corresponding idea of a right: what people are entitled to have. Responsibility is a particularly suitable focus for ethics, because it is more natural and accurate, when judging what it is to live well, to think of what we are responsible for doing than of what we have a right to demand. We might have studied morality through the idea of rights. We might have asked, for example, what aid we all have a right to have, even from strangers, or what help friends or lovers or citizens are entitled to expect from one another. When we come to political morality, however, rights plainly provide a better focus than duties or obligations, because their location is more precise: individuals have political rights, and some of those rights, at least, are matched only by collective duties of the community as a whole rather than of particular individuals.

We begin with the idea of a political right itself: its nature and force. What kind of rights do we each as individuals have against our state—against ourselves collectively? We must be careful because people use the word “right” in so many different senses. We speak of the “right” agricultural policy, for example, or the “right” approach to global warming. Politicians often say that people have a “right” to something—a more restrictive immigration policy, for instance—when they mean only that the public wants that policy or that, in the politicians’ view, the public would be better off having it. Sometimes, however, people use the idea of a political right in a stronger and more discriminating way: to declare that some interests particular people have are so important that these interests must be protected even from policies that would indeed make people as a whole better off.➀

We might say, capturing that idea, that political rights are trumps over otherwise adequate justifications for political action.➁ A policy is normally justified, for instance, if it would make the community safer by reducing violent crime: that is a good all-things-considered justification for increasing taxes to pay for more police. But increased safety is not an adequate justification for forbidding unpopular speeches on street corners or for locking up suspected terrorists indefinitely with no judicial review of the charges against them. Those latter policies violate political rights—the right to free speech and not to be punished without a fair trial. This trump sense of a right is the political equivalent of the most familiar sense in which the idea is used in personal morality. I might say, “I know you could do more good for more people if you broke your promise to me. But I have a right that you keep it nevertheless.”

This chapter studies political rights understood as trumps. It therefore treats only part of political morality; it ignores the much broader question of what are in general good reasons for a political community’s exercising its coercive power in one way rather than another. We say that the government should negotiate trade treaties because these are good for America’s trade balance, or that government should subsidize farmers because that would improve the economy as a whole, or that government should abolish capital punishment because its use demeans our society. Many such claims are informal versions of a utilitarian trade-off argument. We concede that a new airport will make those who live nearby worse off but still insist that the airport is in the general interest because the number it will benefit directly and indirectly is much larger. But not every claim about the general interest appeals to a utilitarian argument. We might think, for example, that even if capital punishment decreases murder, and therefore contributes to a net gain in happiness, it is still unjustified because the moral blight that official killings imposes on the community outweighs the suffering caused by a small increase in murders.

I will not discuss any of these varied justifications for political action, but it is important to bear their range and diversity in mind when we ask our present question. What interests of individual people could be so important as to trump almost all these varied other justifications? For utilitarians and other consequentialists who think that justice is necessarily a matter of aggregation—of improving the overall welfare of the community as a whole—the correct answer is: nothing. We have rejected that aggregative thesis, however, so the question is open for us. Are any interests of particular individuals so important that they must be allowed to trump the general welfare or any other all-things-considered justification? If so, which interests are these—and why? In fact, we have already begun to answer these crucial questions. We began in the last chapter when we discussed political legitimacy and the deep connections between that pivotal idea and the two principles of human dignity we take to be fundamental for both ethics and morality.

I summarize the conclusion of that discussion. A political community has no moral power to create and enforce obligations against its members unless it treats them with equal concern and respect; unless, that is, its policies treat their fates as equally important and respect their individual responsibilities for their own lives. That principle of legitimacy is the most abstract source of political rights. Government has no moral authority to coerce anyone, even to improve the welfare or well-being or goodness of the community as a whole, unless it respects those two requirements person by person. The principles of dignity therefore state very abstract political rights: they trump government’s collective policies. We form this hypothesis: All political rights are derivative from that fundamental one. We fix and defend particular rights by asking, in much more detail, what equal concern and respect require.

That hypothesis explains the capital importance in contemporary political theory of certain interpretive concepts, including the concepts of equality and liberty. In mature democracies people almost all recognize, as an abstract thesis, that government must treat those it governs with equal concern and must allow them the liberties they need to define a successful life for themselves. We disagree, however, about what more concrete rights follow from these abstract ones. We disagree, for instance, whether it follows that government must strive to make the wealth of its citizens less unequal and, if so, how far it must try to make wealth absolutely equal. We also disagree about how far and in what way government may limit its citizens’ freedom of action consistently with recognizing their responsibility for their own lives; we disagree, for instance, about whether laws banning pornography or abortion or requiring seat belts in cars offend that requirement of human dignity. We develop a substantive theory of political rights as trumps through our answers to such questions. That is why political rights are so controversial across political cultures and even within them.

A substantive theory of political rights can be produced most economically by constructing and defending conceptions of these master interpretive concepts. That is what I attempt in the following chapters. We aim, remember, to interpret the two fundamental principles of dignity so that no compromise between the two is necessary; so that each complements and reinforces the other. So we must reject the opinion now popular among political philosophers that liberty and equality are conflicting values. We hope to define equality and liberty together: not only as compatible but as intertwined.

Political Rights and Legal Rights

Legal rights must be distinguished from other political rights, though the distinction is less easy to draw than many legal theorists suppose. I discuss legal rights and the distinction between political and legal rights in Chapter 19. For now we may take a standard example as a paradigm for legal rights: a right enacted by a legislative body of a legitimate government to be enforced on the demand of individual citizens through the decisions, if necessary, of an adjudicative institution like a court. A legal right may be designed to give effect to a preexisting political right: a general law forbidding public schools from excluding students of a minority race, for example. Some political communities give a special status to certain legal rights of that character: they make them constitutional rights that can be cancelled, not by the ordinary processes of legislation, but only, if at all, by a special process that requires extraordinary popular approval. The United States Constitution, for example, forbids government to create any law that denies freedom of religion. The constitutions of some states, including South Africa, impose a duty on government to provide a level of health care for all.

But no nation turns all political rights into constitutional rights or even ordinary legal rights. Americans have a political right to adequate health care or insurance, but for many long decades—until 2010—they had no proper legal right to either. Their government failed in its duty to them by not making their political right into legal rights. And every nation creates legal rights that are not designed to match preexisting political rights. A law awarding farmers a subsidy for not growing corn, for instance, creates a legal right that matches no prior political right. That legal right is nevertheless itself a political right with the power of a trump: a court must order the government to pay a subsidy stipulated by law even if for some reason withholding it from a particular farmer would be in the general interest.

Human Rights (332)

What Are They?

Human rights have had a good press since the Second World War. Dozens of human rights conventions and treaties have been signed, among them the Universal Declaration of Human Rights enacted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1948, the European Convention on Human Rights, and the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights. Hundreds of books, monographs, and studies on the subject have been published. Some people and some institutions use the phrase casually and even hyperbolically. Campaigners declare a human right when they mean that some policy goal—some way of making the world better—is particularly important or urgent. They announce, for instance, a human right that no nuclear power plants be built or that no food be genetically modified or that workers have a stipulated vacation each year. I use the phrase in a stronger way that matches the strong sense of a political right: to designate a trump.

But how shall we then distinguish human rights from other political rights that also act as trumps? It seems widely agreed that not all political rights are human rights. People who all accept that government must show equal concern for all its members disagree about what economic system that requires. An unfettered free market? Socialism? Redistribution according to some standard or goal? Which standard or goal? Egalitarians, libertarians, and utilitarians each present their opinion as indispensable to genuine freedom and equality. But almost none of them would suggest that the many nations that disagree with his opinion are guilty of human rights violations: libertarians argue that taxation is theft, but few claim that it is a violation of a human right. Why not? Human rights are widely thought to be special and, according to most commentators and to political practice, more important and fundamental. In what way?

This is in the first instance only a classificatory question. It asks for a standard that a right must meet to count as a human right, though it need not supply or even point to a suitable test of what rights meet that standard. But, as Charles Beitz has emphasized, our classification cannot be arbitrary.➂ It must be drawn from an interpretation of what he calls the “discursive” practice of human rights that now includes claims in treaties and other international documents and by political officials, international associations of states, judicial bodies, nongovernmental organizations, and academic discussants. Our classification must fit that practice sufficiently well to make our discussion pertinent to it, though it should not prejudge whether the particular rights widely recognized in the practice should in fact be accepted as human rights.

A number of writers have suggested the following classificatory strategy.➃ Human rights are those that trump not merely collective national goals but also national sovereignty understood in a particular way. (This is often called the Westphalian conception of sovereignty because it was prominent in the understanding of the system of nation-states that the Treaties of Westphalia achieved.) According to this conception, one nation or group of nations must not interfere in the internal affairs of another nation. Nations must not attempt, by actual force or threats of force or other sanction, to dictate another nation’s policy or choose its rulers. These writers suggest that we should classify as human rights only those rights important enough to trump national sovereignty on that conception. If those who claim authority over any territory violate these human rights of people in their power, then other nations are permitted to attempt to stop them by means that would otherwise not be permitted—by economic sanctions or even military invasion.

If we accepted that classification and consequence, we would then have to decide, on other grounds, which political rights are sufficiently important to justify sanctions. Important provisos would also be necessary. Any proposed military incursion or severe economic sanction would have to meet two further tests. First, the organization or state proposing such sanction must be authorized to do so under international law. Many international lawyers believe that only a single international institution, the Security Council of the United Nations, can authorize such action; other international lawyers disagree. The second condition is equally important: any such sanction must reasonably be expected to do significantly more good than harm. Even if the invasion of Iraq in 2003, led by the United States, had been licensed under international law, it would nevertheless have failed that second stipulation.

Still, even when we take due account of these further conditions, the trumps-over-sovereignty idea seems to set too high a bar. Human rights conventions describe a variety of rights as human rights that would not justify even economic sanctions, let alone military force. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights lists, as human rights, a right to education, to adequate housing and health care, to marriage, to adequate compensation for work, to equal pay for equal work, and to a presumption of innocence in criminal trials. A protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights prohibits capital punishment. It would nevertheless be wrong for the community of nations, even if licensed by the Security Council and likely to be successful, to march into any nation to establish equal pay for women or more adequate primary schools or to invade Florida to shut down its gas chambers or establish gay marriage there. Economic or military sanctions that inevitably inflict great suffering—most often on the most vulnerable members of the target state—are justified only to stop truly barbaric acts: mass killing or jailing or torturing of political opponents or widespread and savage discrimination.

If you are drawn to the trump-over-sovereignty classification, you might respond to that objection by insisting that the human rights conventions have greatly inflated the category of human rights: that only rights whose violation would be truly barbaric should count in that category, that the rest should be downgraded to some different category. That would seem a shame, however, because it has proved valuable, for international political activists and organizations and, particularly, domestic and international courts developing international customary law, to treat the large variety of rights designated in such documents as having the kind of universal authority the idea of human rights suggests. If we shrunk the category, we would have to invent a new one for rights suitable for recognition and enforcement in those other contexts. It would be better, therefore, to use a more encompassing classification; this need not require us to recognize all the rights set out in the more extravagant conventions, but it should at least explain why nations and groups have been tempted to include such rights.

Other writers have tried a different way to mark off human rights from other political rights: focusing not on the force of human rights to license sanctions but on their substantive content. They seek formulas that show why human rights are in some way particularly important among political rights. These formulas have proved elusive, however, because it has proved difficult to frame a distinction in that way. All political rights are particularly important. If I think that a state denies equal concern, on the right conception of that requirement, because it does not sufficiently redistribute the economic result of free-market transactions to its poor, then I think it denies some people the lives they are entitled to have. It condemns some of them to unjust poverty. What could be more fundamental or important than that? How could we identify, in demarcating human rights, a more fundamental level of support than what people’s dignity requires? As that question suggests, scholarly attempts to define some more fundamental and more sternly required level have proved arbitrary.➄

I suggest a different strategy, one based on the distinction I introduced in our discussion of legitimacy in Chapter 14. We disagree, across nations and among ourselves, about what political rights people have. We disagree, as we just noticed, about what economic system the right conception of equal respect requires. We also disagree about what counts as the proper respect for people’s individual ethical responsibility: some nations make a particular religion the official religion of the state, while others, including the United States, regard religious establishment as unconstitutional. We disagree about political rights in countless other ways as well. We must therefore insist that though people do have a political right to equal concern and respect on the right conception, they have a more fundamental, because more abstract, right. They have a right to be treated with the attitude that these debates presuppose and reflect—a right to be treated as a human being whose dignity fundamentally matters.

That more abstract right—the right to an attitude—is the basic human right. Government may respect that basic human right even when it fails to achieve a correct understanding of more concrete political rights—even when its tax structure is, as we think, unjust. We distinguish and deploy that basic human right through the interpretive question described in our discussion of legitimacy. We ask: Can the laws and policies of a particular political community sensibly be interpreted as an attempt, even if finally a failed attempt, to respect the dignity of those in its power? Or must at least some of its laws and policies be understood as a rejection of those responsibilities, toward either its subjects at large or some group within them? The latter laws or policies violate a human right.

That distinction between human rights and other political rights is of great practical importance and theoretical significance. It is the distinction between mistake and contempt. The test, I emphasize, is interpretive; it cannot be satisfied simply by a nation’s pronouncement of good faith. It is satisfied only when a government’s overall behavior is defensible under an intelligible, even if unconvincing, conception of what our two principles of dignity require. Nations and lawyers will of course disagree even about how and where that line should be drawn. But some judgments—those that match the world’s consensus about the most basic human rights—will be obvious.➅ Nothing could be a plainer violation of the first principle of dignity than acts that exhibit blatant prejudice—assumptions of supposed superiority of one caste over another or of believers over infidels or Aryans over Semites or whites over blacks. These are the attitudes most horribly evident in genocide. Sometimes the contempt is more personal: people in power sometimes humiliate, rape, or torture their victims just as a demonstration of contempt or, what comes to the same thing, just for amusement. No nation that supposes that some people are of inferior stock or that condones humiliation and torture for amusement can claim that it embraces an intelligible conception of human dignity.

Now look quickly at the second principle: that individuals have a personal responsibility to define success in their own lives. That principle supports the traditional liberal rights of free speech and expression, conscience, political activity, and religion that most human rights documents include. Different nations and cultures take different views about how those liberal rights should be defined and protected in detail. Societies also differ about what we might call surface paternalism. Most of us think that compulsory education until late adolescence and mandatory seat belts are permissible forms of paternalism, because the first unqualifiedly enhances rather than diminishes a person’s capacity to take charge of his own life and the second helps people achieve what they actually want in spite of moments of acknowledged weakness. Some societies indulge more serious paternalism, but they do not violate human rights unless that level of interference could not plausibly be understood in one of these ways. Different political cultures, we might say, take different views about how the personal responsibility of individuals is to be protected.

But once again some acts of government express not a good-faith effort to define and enforce that responsibility but rather a denial of personal responsibility altogether. Governments that forbid the exercise of any but a designated religion or that punish heresy or blasphemy or deny in principle the right of free speech or of the press violate human rights for that reason. So do governments that intimidate or kill or torture people because they hate or fear their political opinions. The right not to be tortured has long been thought the paradigm human right, first on everyone’s list. Offering inducements like a reduced sentence to an accused criminal in exchange for information, however objectionable it might seem on other grounds, leaves a prisoner’s ability intact to weigh costs and consequences. As I said in Chapter 10, torture is designed to extinguish that power, to reduce its victim to an animal for whom decision is no longer possible. That is the most profound insult to his dignity as conceived in our two principles. It is the most profound outrage to his human rights.

The case for other human rights on this test is equally compelling. Respect for the importance of any life forbids harming (as distinct from failing to aid) some people for the benefit of others. It is therefore a violation of human rights deliberately to punish people who have committed no crime, even when this is supposedly for the general good; it is also flatly inconsistent with human rights to punish except through procedures reasonably well calculated to protect the innocent. It is controversial which form of trial, subject to which procedures and safeguards, is necessary, but it is not controversial that some form of trial is required, and imprisonment without trial is therefore a violation of a human right. Some forms of paternalism are at least arguably consistent with personal responsibility, as I said. But in our age, laws that forbid property, profession, or political power to women cannot be reconciled with women’s responsibility for their own destiny. These are the clear, indisputable cases. Some such acts may be sufficiently serious as to require formal economic and even, if barbaric, military intervention, provided the two crucial conditions I described earlier are met. In less grave and more controversial cases the proper forum of enforcement is not an economic or military battleground but the chambers of international courts and tribunals that rely on treaties, international law, or more informal international pressure to secure compliance.

This understanding of human rights helps explain the abstract character of the human rights treaties and documents I mentioned earlier. The preamble to the Universal Declaration begins with a reference to the “inherent dignity … of all members of the human family,” and many of the rights it specifies seem simply to restate that perfectly abstract idea. Even the relatively concrete provisions—about education, work, and equal pay, for instance—require interpretation aimed at limiting their scope before they become applicable in practice. We should understand these provisions and comparable provisions in other treaties and documents not as attempts to define human rights in any detail but rather as directions pointing to sensitive areas in which a nation’s practices might well reveal the unacceptable attitude that violates the basic human right. They invite interpretive questions. Does a nation’s record of regulation of political speech or journalism, or its provision of health care or public education, or its broad economic policy, show a good-faith attempt to respect the dignity called for in the Declaration’s preamble? Or does it rather show an indifference to or contempt for that dignity? In the latter case, the Declaration declares, that nation has violated a human right. On this understanding human rights treaties and conventions pose questions that await interpretive answers.

Our understanding is also helpful in answering a familiar question of human rights theory. Are human rights truly universal? Or is any list only parochial? Do human rights depend on features of local culture or history that universal declarations ignore? Or are some human rights, at least, independent of such circumstance? We answer each of these questions: yes and no. The interpretive judgment must in its nature be sensitive to different economic conditions and political and cultural profiles and histories. It must be sensitive to such differences because these plainly affect which of the available interpretations—an effort to realize equal concern and respect or indifference to these ideals—is more accurate, all things considered. A health or education policy that would show good-faith effort in a poor country would show contempt in a rich one. But the abstract standard itself—the basic understanding that dignity requires equal concern for the fate of all and full respect for personal responsibility—is not relative. It is genuinely universal.

I do not mean that that abstract standard has been or is universally endorsed. On the contrary, it plainly has not and is not. But if we believe in human rights at all—or in any other rights, for that matter—we must take a stand on the true basis of such rights. My understanding of human dignity might be defective. You must judge for yourself and, if necessary, correct my account. But unless you are tempted by a global skepticism about human and political rights, you must find a basis for such rights in some formulation of that kind, and you must embrace that formulation not because you find it embedded in some culture or shared by all or most nations but because you believe it to be true. You must make applications of your basic premise sensitive to a variety of circumstance that vary across regions and nations. But your judgments must be grounded finally in something that is not relative: your judgment about the conditions of human dignity and the threats that coercive power offers to that dignity.

You might worry that it is both arrogant and impolitic to claim absolute truth as the basis of a theory of human rights. One critic calls my account of dignity “theological or dogmatic” and argues that because different cultures embrace different values, it is wrong to ground a theory of human rights on any single one of these.➆ But we must do that—not to prefer one culture to another, but to prefer truth as we judge it. We have no option. If we proceed in any other way—by seeking some common denominator across cultures, for instance—we still need a justification for picking that strategy, and our justification for that choice must claim not popularity but truth. An ecumenicist strategy, all the way down, is deep logical confusion.

No doubt we must take pluralism into account in deciding what account of human rights could possibly be agreed upon in treaties and enforced in practice. Perhaps—though this is far from evident—it would be wise tactics not to stress the principled foundations of our views when we know others would reject those foundations. But we need to know what we ourselves believe about human rights before we begin to negotiate or persuade. Otherwise we can have no proper aim in view.

Human Rights and Religion

Our practical and diplomatic difficulties have been pointlessly magnified, however, because so many people in Europe and America insist on connecting human rights with some religious tradition. If we insist that human rights have finally a religious source and ground, then our appeal to those rights will inflame people whose religious traditions and convictions are very different from our own, particularly those who believe that their religion commands the very acts that we decry and try to punish. If we insist that human rights rest on religion, we also confront a paradox in our own values. We believe that religious tolerance is among the most basic of human rights, and we therefore think that it violates people’s rights to force upon them religious doctrines and practices that they do not accept. But is not that exactly what we do when our invading armies march under a banner of religious rhetoric?

The idea that generates these difficulties—that human rights have a religious foundation—is a very old one. Human rights are widely thought to descend from natural rights; these in turn were supposed to be deliverances of natural law, which, at least in the central expository tradition of that idea, was understood to be divine law. Thomas Jefferson may well have been an atheist—there is a dispute among historians about that—but he was only reporting received ideas and common rhetoric when he declared it self-evident that a human being is “endowed by his Creator with inalienable rights to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.” Former president George W. Bush often announced that “freedom is God’s gift to everyone,” as if our freedom were an act of divine charity. The religious origin of human rights is even more manifest in Islamic countries. Article 24 of the 1990 Cairo Declaration of Human Rights, for example, states, “All rights and freedoms mentioned in this statement are subject to the Islamic Shari’a,” and Article 25 adds, “The Islamic Shari’a is the only source for the interpretation or explanation of each individual article of this statement.”

In fact, however, no divine authority can provide a ground for basic human rights. On the contrary, the logic of argument runs the other way: we must assume the independent and logically prior existence of human rights in order to accept the idea of divine moral authority. I assume no particular view about the existence or character of a god or gods in making that perhaps radical claim. I do not base my rejection of ungrounded divine authority on atheism or any other form of skepticism. In fact I shall assume, for the purpose of this chapter, that a single anthropomorphic god as conceived in traditional monotheistic religions has existed and will exist forever; that that god has created the universe and all forms of life in it; that he has in particular created human beings in his own image; that he is, moreover, an all-powerful creator and destroyer; and that he is all-knowing and all-foreseeing. I know that many people who regard themselves as religious do not accept this traditional picture. They express their faith differently and in my view more mysteriously: in the declarations I mentioned in Chapter 9 that the universe contains a higher force or that it houses something bigger than we are or that we can glimpse the divine nature only through a glass darkly and hence must not suppose an anthropomorphic god of which we are an image. But it will be easier for me to put the argument I intend if I assume a more traditional supernatural cosmology.

I said nothing about goodness or morality in that crude account of a god. I supposed that a god is an all-powerful creator, but that is not to say—or to deny—that that god is good. Or that he has moral authority, by which I mean that his commands impose genuine moral obligations. Of course, the Abrahamic religions attribute moral virtue and authority as well as omnipotence and omniscience to their god, but I mean to separate those these two components of an overall religious view. Religions commonly have two parts: cosmological and evaluative. First, they answer the question of what there is and why. How did the world and its parts, including life and human life, come to exist? What or who determines how the world will go? Is there a soul? If so, what happens to the soul after death? Second, religions also—but separately—answer the question of what there should be and why. What is right and what wrong? What is important and not important? What must I do with my life? When must I sacrifice it, for example? How must I treat other people? When, if ever, may or should I kill?

Many theologians and some philosophers find this distinction between two parts of a religion illegitimate. They think that goodness is an inherent quality of a god, so that imagining his extraordinary power without also imagining his goodness is impossible. Indeed, some versions of the still-robust ontological argument for a god’s existence include goodness as a necessary property. But the ancient Greek conception of the gods was very different; this shows at least the conceptual possibility of separating omnipotence from goodness, and that is all I am assuming. Moreover, to repeat, I do not deny that the god I am assuming, the all-powerful and omniscient creature who has created everything, really is good, and that his commands do have moral authority. I only ask what the source of that goodness and moral authority is.

Hume’s principle holds that these moral properties cannot follow directly from a god’s omnipotence and omniscience: we cannot derive an ought from an is. You can sensibly declare that a god is good and that his commands should be obeyed only if you accept some further background premise about value on which you rely. You may suppose that a god created the universe and created you as well. You may suppose that he has issued commands like those of the Ten Commandments. But you cannot infer just from those facts that you have any moral reason to obey those commands or that the commands will conduce to a morally good state of affairs or, indeed, a state of affairs desirable in any other way. You need an additional premise to draw God’s moral authority from his power and knowledge. Consider the analogy to governments. Terrestrial rulers are legitimate only if they satisfy certain procedural and substantive principles of legitimacy. That philosophical requirement holds for divine as well as mundane rule.

I am taking sides in an ancient theological controversy.➇ Is a god good because he obeys moral laws, or are certain laws moral laws only because a god had commanded them? This is sometimes presented as a dilemma. If a god is bound by moral laws, he is not all-powerful because he cannot change what is finally right or wrong, good or bad. If, on the other hand, his commands create morality, then he is good only in a trivial, tautological sense. The dilemma is a false one: the proposition that someone’s power is less than it might be because he cannot turn bad into good is just another way of violating Hume’s principle. No exercise of creative power, however great, can shift fundamental moral truth. So the familiar idea that a god is the ultimate source of morality is confused: the old churchmen who said that his goodness reflects some independent moral law or truth had the better of the argument.

It does not follow, of course, that a god cannot have moral authority: that he cannot create genuine moral duties through his commands. Parliaments have no moral authority unless they act in accordance with fundamental principles of political morality, but they nevertheless can create new moral obligations when they do. I have a moral duty to pay taxes at a certain rate only because a parliament has declared that I must. So the fact that a god has no automatic moral authority does not refute the claim that he is responsible for human rights. These rights may be morally imperative only because a god has commanded us to respect them. If that is so, however, then it is because some more basic principle has endowed god with the moral authority to create new moral rights. What could that more basic principle be?

The god I am imagining, who has unlimited creative and destructive capacities, enjoys stick-and-carrot power over all human beings. He can send an AIDS epidemic to Greenwich Village to punish homosexuals or provide a battalion of virgins in heaven for murderous suicides. Many people credit their god’s moral authority to these powers of punishment and reward. But threats and bribes do not supply legitimacy. Others credit their god’s moral authority to the fact that he created them.➈ There is a widespread opinion that someone who created something—a sculptor who mixes his labor with a marble block—owns what he has created and therefore has moral authority, though no doubt limited, over what happens to it. But blocks of marble have no moral duty to obey their creator, and people are in any case not blocks of marble. Children do owe duties to their parents, and these include, though only for a limited time, some limited obligation to do what their parents direct. But so far as this authority includes the power to create moral obligation—an obligation to participate in some joint family project, for instance—it depends on a host of social practices and understandings of the kind we reviewed in the last chapter. Parental authority does not in any case stem from mere creation: adoptive parents have the same moral authority as biological ones. If God has the authority to create fresh moral obligations, this must be in consequence of some principle different from John Locke’s theory of property.

It may now be objected, by people whose religion is instinctive, that we do not need to find any principle that gives a god moral authority over us. It is enough to say that his authority is just a moral fact we perceive or intuit as an act of faith. That would not be to lapse back into the tautology that whatever a god does is by definition good. We might concede that his goodness is substantive but still insist that we can perceive or intuit his moral authority directly, as a brute moral fact, just as many people insist that they perceive or intuit his existence and power as brute facts. This claim neglects, however, the crucial difference between the domains of fact and value that we have now several times noticed.

A god’s existence and achievements, if any god does exist, are matters of fact, albeit rather special and exotic facts. Any god’s moral authority, if this exists, is a matter of value. Claims of fact can be barely true: the kind of god I am imagining might exist, not in virtue of any law of nature but just as an independent brute fact. The world of value is different: nothing is barely true there. Something can be right or wrong only in virtue of a principle that ramifies across a whole terrain of morality. It cannot be a bare moral fact, one we can just intuit, that genocide is wrong or that poor people in an affluent society have a right to basic medical care. We cannot be right or wrong about those claims without also and in consequence being right or wrong about a great deal else. We may be ignorant of the principles in virtue of which an omnipotent and omniscient being has moral authority over us. But if we believe that he does have that moral authority, we must also accept that some principled account of that authority can, in principle, be constructed. This is just to repeat, in this rarefied context, the lessons of Part One and of Chapter 7.

The arguments for a god’s moral authority we have been reviewing to this point all begin in some fact that makes a god unique: his power to impose punishments or grant favors, his role as creator of the universe, or the special epistemic power of religious faith. We need a very different argument: one that focuses not on the uniqueness of some supernatural creature but on the general conditions of moral authority, conditions that hold even in less exalted contexts of power. We are then immediately back in familiar terrain. Political rulers claim moral authority: they claim the power to impose fresh moral obligations on those subject to their dominion through legislation and decree. But we do not recognize that moral authority unless the rulers’ governance is legitimate, and we do not accept government as legitimate unless it treats those over whom it claims moral authority with the right attitude. It must show equal concern for the importance of their lives, and it must allow each of them responsibility for his own life. If we claim that a god has moral authority over all peoples, then we must suppose an equal divine concern and respect for all peoples. The idea popular in some religions, that their god cares only or mainly for subscribers to their religion or for the particular ethnic stock of its faithful, subverts the claim of that religion to their god’s moral authority.

We must, I said, stand on our own convictions, here as everywhere in the domain of value. We must insist, with due courtesy and after full reflection, that we are right. But we must not appeal to our religion or our god as proof of that claim. We may, if so persuaded, treat our god as a moral legislator on less fundamental issues: on elements of our ethics or personal or even political morality. We may come to think that a god’s declaration makes some ethical ideal, some theory about how to live, true. But we cannot, without disabling circularity, treat any god as the source of the most fundamental part of our political morality: our convictions about legitimacy or about human rights.

My argument does not denigrate religion, which has been a remarkable force for good as well as evil over human history. Though the evil may be more prominent in our minds right now, fixed by terror and bigotry, history is too complex to allow that as the final word. My aim has rather been to place the case for human rights on a different plane. We need not rely on our own religion, leaving those of other faiths behind, when we argue for the innate rights of all human beings. We can argue not from what divides us but from what unites us. We all—Muslim, Jew, or Christian, atheist or zealot—face the same inescapable challenge of a life to lead, death to face, and dignity to redeem.

Concepts (344)

Criterial Error

We have found our two principles of dignity at the end of many brick roads—personal ethics, personal morality, political legitimacy, political rights, and human rights. Now we unwind these principles further to explore equality and liberty, the two interpretive concepts that dominate politics and political philosophy. I understand liberty to include both negative and positive liberty, and I therefore count the concept of democracy as part of this study. We disagree about what those concepts really mean: about what genuine democracy, political equality, and negative liberty really are. Those are topics for the following three chapters. I use a short advance summary here—which looks back to Chapter 8 and anticipates later arguments of this Part Five—to show why it is so important to understand that these are interpretive concepts. Much energy has been wasted by the defeating assumption that liberty, equality, and democracy are criterial concepts that can be explicated through some neutral analysis that makes no assumption about their value or importance. These efforts have each ended in paradox.

Liberty

Consider, for example, John Stuart Mill’s classic account of liberty: this is the freedom, he said, to do what one wants. If that is what liberty is, then of course any government must constantly abridge liberty; it does so when it prohibits rape or arson. But we are then confronted with a dilemma. It is necessary to make arson and rape criminal, but do we nevertheless commit a special kind of wrong, a compromise of an important value, when we do so? If we think not then, because we have defined liberty so that these laws infringe liberty, we do not really value liberty for its own sake or take liberty as such to be essential to dignity. We only value something else often associated with liberty. But what is that something else? It does not help to say that we value only fundamental liberty. We must explain what makes one liberty more fundamental than another, and we cannot explain that by supposing that some commodity we name liberty is more at stake when a fundamental liberty is in question.

Suppose, on the other hand, we insist that it is in itself a special kind of wrong to stop people from doing what they want to do—in itself bad to stop some people from raping others—even when this wrong is overall justified. We then need to say why. If we are utilitarians, as Mill was, we might think that any constraint that causes unhappiness or frustration is harmful, and therefore an occasion for regret, even when necessary. But that strategy does not show that stopping someone from doing what he wants is a special kind of harm; it simply counts any unhappiness it causes in the cost column of a felicific calculus, along with other, very different, sources of unhappiness, like government’s failure to provide air conditioning in public buildings. It makes liberty into nothing special.

We cannot say that preventing rape is a special kind of harm because any constraint on freedom is an insult to dignity. If the argument of Chapter 14 about political obligation is right, a legitimate government does not compromise dignity when it acts to protect some citizens from the violence of others. If we did think that every prohibition of crime automatically compromises dignity, then we would have to treat much of what government now does as gravely wrong. My town council could not fairly stop me from painting my Georgian house purple. It could hardly claim that this constraint is necessary to protect the safety or freedom of others, so it would be sacrificing my dignity to mere aesthetics.

Equality

Treating equality as a criterial concept has been at least equally unfortunate. It encourages the dismissive view that equality means flat equality—everyone having the same wealth throughout their lives—because no other definition is plausible if we take equality to be criterial.➉ It is now respectable even among liberals to say that equality is a false value because what is important is not that people have equal wealth but that those at the bottom not have less than is necessary for a decent life, or to avoid great inequality, or something of the sort. That view has been encouraged by a dispute sparked by John Rawls’s account of distributive justice. His “difference principle” requires that any deviation from flat equality of “primary goods” be such as to improve the position of the worst-off group.⑪ In some circumstances that principle would justify offering people with wealth-producing talents high incomes as an incentive to exercise those talents, because that would make everyone, including the poor, better off. Some critics object that the difference principle is insufficiently egalitarian. For a variety of social and personal reasons, they declare, it is better that everyone has the same wealth, and so share a common fate, than that some be rich and others poor, even if everyone then has less material wealth.⑫

But other, more numerous, critics declare the difference principle too egalitarian because it restricts its focus to the worst-off group: it would be better, they say, to settle for what many of them term a less rigid “priority” for the poor.⑬ In general, they say, policy should favor those at the bottom. But suppose a community must choose between an economic strategy that would bring much greater wealth to the large middle and lower-middle classes and a different strategy that would instead make a small poorest group marginally less poor. It would be silly, these critics insist, to choose the latter strategy. Or, at least, silly unless the difference the latter policy made to the condition of the poor transformed their lives rather than making only a notional improvement. Still other critics reject even this apparently moderate position. They declare equality a demeaning goal and argue that a political community must put its faith in liberty. Some of them announce a further, though by now discredited, faith: that incentives for the talented will produce enough wealth so that some “trickles down” to the poor.⑭ Others simply say, or at least believe, that the poor should look after themselves.

The argument among these various opinions is spoilt by the assumption that when we debate how important equality is, or when it should yield to other values like prosperity for the middle classes, we are debating how important it is that everyone have the same thing. We then face difficulties like those created by the supposedly neutral sense of liberty. Is equality, so understood, a value in itself? Is it intrinsically good that different people have the same wealth, so that any deviation from flat equality is regrettable even if it is justified by some overriding consideration like economic rationality? That seems implausible. Why is it desirable that people should have the same wealth, when some spend while others save, or when some work and others play?

We may decide, for these reasons, that flat equality is not in itself of any moral significance. Then why should we debate how far we should strive to approach that goal? Why should we then suppose, for example, as Rawls does, that deviations from flat equality need special justification? But if, on the other hand, we decide that flat equality of wealth is indeed good in itself, then why should that value be compromised at all? If at all, when? What competitive value requires that compromise and measures the desired extent? How should we decide whether it is better overall to have less of the intrinsic value of equality so that the middle class can be more prosperous, for instance? From what neutral perspective or metric can we make and defend that judgment? Again, nothing seems available except a sterile clash of “intuitions.”

Democracy

The debate about democracy—equality in the political sphere—has suffered in the same way. Philosophers and political scientists have gravitated to a supposedly neutral account of democracy: democracy is government according to the will of the majority expressed in reasonably frequent elections with nearly full suffrage after political debate with free speech and a free press. With some such definition in hand, lawyers and politicians argue about whether the American practice of judicial review (now emulated to a greater or lesser extent in many other nations) can be justified. Under that practice, a court—finally, in America, the Supreme Court—can rule that a law adopted by a parliament that represents majority will is nevertheless so offensive to fundamental constitutional rights that it has no legal effect. Some lawyers and philosophers condemn the practice as offensive to democracy. Others defend it on the ground that while democracy is important, it is not the only value and must sometimes be compromised to serve other values like human rights.

Once again this approach produces only dilemma: we encounter the same, now familiar, problem. Is democracy, understood as majority rule, something valuable in itself? That seems at least doubtful. Why should the fact that numerically more people favor one course of action over another signal that the more favored policy is either fairer or better? We might say: when people locked in a joint enterprise disagree about what should be done, the only fair solution is to count heads. But that must be rejected as a universal default principle of fair play: it is not automatically true. Another hoary philosophical example: When a lifeboat is overcrowded and one passenger must go overboard to save the rest, majority vote would seem close to the worst method of choosing the victim. Personal attachments and antagonisms would play a role they should not play, and so a lottery would be much superior. Those attachments and antagonisms spoil politics as well, but on a much larger scale, and this makes the idea that majority vote is intrinsically or automatically fair in that context seem at least dubious.

But if democracy means majority rule, and majority rule is not something desirable in itself, then why should we care so much to protect our democracy? Or to expand democracy in other countries through any means we can adopt? Why do we argue so much about whether judicial review is democratic or whether replacing our first-past-the-post election machinery with proportional representation would make us more democratic? In these and a hundred other ways we do treat democracy as a value, and accepting that it is not—that there is nothing intrinsically good about it—would make much of our political life silly.

A Better Program (349)

There is nothing to be said for the standard definitions of equality, liberty, and democracy proposed by Mill, Rawls, and most political scientists. They do not track the criteria everyone uses when he identifies egalitarian policies, liberal societies, or democratic institutions. There are no such shared criteria; if there were, we would not argue in the way we do. Some philosophers who assume that all concepts are criterial conclude that the failure of agreement makes the concepts useless and that we should manage without them. We should ask not what is democratic but what system of government is better on the whole; not whether equality or liberty is good but what distribution of resources or opportunities is best. This reductive approach is deceptive, however. It is appropriate only for those who already hold some theory, like the more fantastic versions of utilitarianism, that offer a single factual metric of political value against which all policies and institutions can be tested. Without such a fantasy we are left with no rudder in the current. How do we even begin to decide what form of government or distribution of resource is better, if we have no background ideals to guide us?

We do better when we accept that the familiar concepts of political virtue are interpretive concepts. Then we understand why they are so prominent in the politics of nations whose political cultures were dramatically reformed in the Enlightenment. We understand why the defining revolutions of those nations were explicitly dedicated to liberty, equality, and democracy and yet settled very little about what these actually mean. We also understand how we should proceed to develop our own conceptions of these values: our own convictions about the concrete political rights they name. The proper distribution of wealth into private and collective property is the distribution required by the community’s obligation to treat the lives of every member with equal concern. For a community that accepts the first principle of dignity, a theory of economic equality just is a theory of distributive justice: the two concepts are identical. For a community that accepts the second principle, a conception of liberty must show the proper respect for the responsibility of each person to identify and pursue success in his own life. A conception of liberty includes a conception of that responsibility. In such a community, the distribution of political power must reflect both these principles: the structure and decisions of government must acknowledge both people’s equal importance and their personal responsibility. A conception of democracy is a conception of how that challenge is best met through political structures and practices. Because we aim to interpret our two principles as mutually supporting, not conflicting, we must try to develop conceptions of equality, liberty, and democracy that support one another as well.

This strategy for studying political rights is strikingly different from what is often called the historical approach. Many philosophers—Isaiah Berlin and Bernard Williams were prominent recent examples—have argued that we cannot appreciate the character or force of a political concept like liberty until we have gained a sense through history of what it meant to our political predecessors.⑮ In one sense the project I recommend is historical: it is right to treat liberty, equality, and democracy as interpretive concepts only if those concepts function as interpretive, and the question whether they do has a historical dimension. In that way interpretation engages history, but history does not fix interpretation.

I do not mean that a concept is interpretive only if those who use it understand that it is interpretive. As I said earlier, very few people have the concept of a concept, let alone the concept of an interpretive concept. I mean that we must be able to make best sense of the concept’s use over history—best sense of the ways in which people take themselves to be agreeing and disagreeing—by supposing that it is interpretive. If the great political concepts are indeed interpretive, however, then history is no privileged guide to their best interpretation. The fact that throughout modern history many people have supposed that taxes infringe liberty or that democracy means absolute majority rule does not mean that an interpretation that denies this is false. They may have been—I think they were—mistaken. Perhaps those philosophers who believe that a study of these concepts must be densely historical have simply assumed that the concepts are criterial. If so, it is their approach, not the one I recommend, that is unhistorical.

===============================================================================
p.473

➀ James Griffin misunderstands this suggestion. See James Griffin, On Human Rights (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), 20, repeated in Griffin, “Human Rights and the Autonomy of International Law,” in Samantha Besson and John Tasioulas, eds., The Philosophy of International Law (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010). Of course, political rights do not hold only against a government that aims to improve the general good. The trump test sets a standard that a claim of right must meet—the interest it protects must be sufficiently important that it would overcome even a generally proper political justification. The test does not suggest that people have no rights against tyrants whose aims are not proper. A right may be regarded as a trump, moreover, even though it might not trump the general good in cases of emergency: when the competing interests are grave and urgent, as they might be when large numbers of lives or the survival of a state is in question. Then, we might say, the trump gets trumped not by an ordinary justification but by a higher trump. See my “Rights as Trumps,” in Jeremy Waldron, ed., Theories of Rights (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985). It is controversial among political philosophers, moreover, whether groups of individuals have political rights—whether we can properly speak of the rights of an ethnic minority within a larger political community, for instance. See, e.g., Will Kymlicka, Liberalism, Community, and Culture (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989). My own view is that only individuals have political rights, though these rights include a right not to be discriminated against because they are members of some group and may also include a right to benefits in common with other members of their group—a right, for instance, that legal proceedings be available in their group’s language. However, I shall not pursue this question here. My argument holds equally for group political rights if there are any.

➁ The metaphor is not universally admired. See Robin West, “Rights, Harms, and Duties: A Response to Justice for Hedgehogs,” in Symposium: Justice for Hedgehogs: A Conference on Ronald Dworkin’s Forthcoming Book (special issue), Boston University Law Review 90, no. 2 (April 2010) (hereafter BU): 819, and my “Response” in that issue.

➂ Charles Beitz, The Idea of Human Rights (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009), 96ff .

➃ See, e.g., John Rawls, The Law of Peoples, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999); Joseph Raz, “Human Rights without Foundations,” in Samantha Besson and John Tasioulas, eds., The Philosophy of International Law (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 321ff.; John Skorupski, “Human Rights,” in Besson and Tasioulas, Philosophy of International Law, 357.

➄ In On Human Rights, Griffin makes what he calls “personhood” the touchstone of human rights; he says that respect for personhood requires guarantees of welfare, liberty, and autonomy, and that these are therefore human rights (149). He accepts the challenge described in the text: to explain why human rights differ from other political rights. But he believes the challenge can be met by a more refined description of what personhood itself requires. “On the personhood account … the cut-off point is when the proximate necessary conditions for normative agency are met … there will be hard interpretive work to be done on the idea of ‘proximate necessary conditions for normative agency’ to make it sharper edged” (183). But, as Joseph Raz has pointed out, this is unhelpful. On the one hand, if the conditions Griffin has in mind are those necessary for a very limited autonomy, they are too easily met. Even slaves make some decisions. On the other hand, if the conditions are taken to be those necessary for a substantial degree of welfare, liberty, and autonomy, then the problem remains of distinguishing between human rights and other political rights. Where is the line to be drawn? See Raz, “Human Rights without Foundations.” Griffin’s response seems only to confirm Raz’s complaint. He suggests that “practicalities” will help us to determine the “threshold” of autonomy that human rights protect, but that “considerable work” is necessary to find the right threshold (347–49).

Charles Beitz believes that human rights should be identified not through some “top down” principle, like respect for personhood, but through interpretation of human rights practice, guided, as it must be, by a sense of the point of that institution (Beitz, The Idea of Human Rights). But as we noticed throughout Part Two of this book, interpretation of that kind requires general principles that can fix the best justification of the raw data of that practice, and these must be “top down” principles of the kind Beitz wants to avoid. He recognizes the need to distinguish human rights from other political rights; he says that human rights are narrower than the political rights that define a just society (142). But his suggested standards for the necessary distinction seem unpromising. He says that some requirements of justice are less urgent than others, that some purported rights would be harder than others to enforce internationally, and that some requirements of justice can sensibly be thought to vary among societies with different economic, social, and cultural backgrounds (143). The second of these standards mixes the question whether it would be permissible for the international community to intervene, if it could do so effectively, with the different question whether it can indeed do so effectively. These speak to different conditions for intervention that are best kept distinct and, in any case, are irrelevant to all cases except barbarism, because only these justify intervention. His first standard requires a metric for urgency that, when supplied, may not produce the right results. How should we rank in urgency, for instance, rights to expression of racist opinion, abortion, expensive lifesaving renal dialysis, same-sex marriage, and no imprisonment without a fair trial? The third standard does not discriminate between justice and human rights; the former as well as the latter vary to some degree with national background, and the standard does not tell us why human rights vary more than justice does.

➅ Ronald Dworkin, Is Democracy Possible Here? Principles for a New Political Debate (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2006).

➆ Robert D. Sloane, “Human Rights for Hedgehogs? Global Value Pluralism, International Law, and Some Reservations of the Fox,” BU: 975.

➇ The puzzle is as old as Plato’s Euthyphro (Plato, The Last Days of Socrates, trans. Hugh Tredennick and Harold Tarrant (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1993). For more modern treatments, see, e.g., Ralph Cudworth, A Treatise Concerning Eternal and Immutable Morality (1731; New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996); Mark Schroeder, “Cudworth and Normative Explanations,” Journal of Ethics and Social Philosophy 1 (2005): 1–27.

➈ Bishop R. C. Mortimer was attracted to this suggestion. “The first foundation is the doctrine of God the Creator. God made us and all the world. Because of that He has an absolute claim on our obedience. We do not exist in our own right, but only as His creatures, who ought therefore to do and be what He desires” (Robert C. Mortimer, Christian Ethics [London: Hutchinson’s University Library, 1950], 7).

➉ Harry Frankfurt assumes this is what equality means. See his “Equality as a Moral Ideal,” in William Letwin, ed., Against Equality: Readings in Economic and Social Policy (London: Macmillan, 1983), 21. Frankfurt argues against “the doctrine that it is desirable for everyone to have the same amounts of income and wealth (for short, ‘money’).”

⑪ John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1971).

⑫ See, e.g., R. George White, “The High Cost of Rawls’ Inegalitarianism,” www.jstor.org/stable/448214.

⑬ See Derek Parfit, Equality or Priority (Lawrence: University of Kansas, 1995).

⑭ The term “trickle down” is used mainly as a pejorative. The theory itself, often called Reaganomics, is vigorous though discredited. See “Live Free or Move,” editorial, Wall Street Journal, May 16, 2006.

⑮ Isaiah Berlin, “Two Concepts of Liberty” (1958), in Four Essays on Liberty (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1969); Bernard Williams, “From Freedom to Liberty: The Construction of a Political Value,” Philosophy & Public Affairs 30, no. 1 (2001): 3–26.

===============================================================================

Key concepts:

democracy (347)

difference principle (346)

equality (346)

flat equality (346)

god (340)
- a god’s existence and achievements are matters of fact
- any god’s moral authority is a matter of value (343)

human rights (332):
- those that trump not merely collective national goals but also national sovereignty; this classification is too strict
- right to an attitude (335)
- a right to be treated as a human being whose dignity fundamentally matters
- the abstract standard is universal
- cannot have a religious foundation

liberty (345)
- negative liberty
- positive liberty

political morality (327): studies what we all together owe others as individuals when we act in and on behalf of that artificial collective person

political rights (329): are trumps over otherwise adequate justifications for political action

religions (340): two part:
- cosmological
- evaluative
  Hume’s principle: you need an additional premise to draw God’s moral authority from his power and knowledge
  No exercise of creative power, however great, can shift fundamental moral truth