17 Liberty (364)

The Dimensions of Freedom

Two Kinds of Liberty?

Equality may be in decline, but liberty is in vogue. We fight wars in its name, and political parties denounce other parties for ignoring it. But, like equality, liberty is an interpretive concept: politicians all promise to respect it, but they disagree about what it is. Some say that taxation destroys the freedom we cherish; others that taxation makes that freedom possible. Some think that the proliferation of pollution controls has compromised liberty; others that it has made people more free. We might be tempted to say: given that people mean such different things when they talk about liberty, we should stop using that term and instead just argue about what kind of government is good government. But as I said earlier, that reductive suggestion comes to nothing. We believe that it is a condition of good government that it respect the second principle of dignity, and so we must ask what that means. Whatever language we use, we are then asking for the best understanding of liberty. So we must treat liberty as an interpretive concept and treat our disagreements about liberty as genuine.

However, we face the further question whether there are not one but two interpretive concepts of liberty. Two famous essays make that claim—Benjamin Constant’s The Liberty of the Ancients and the Liberty of the Moderns, and Isaiah Berlin’s Two Concepts of Liberty.➀ The argument they make in different ways seems plausible, and it has been very widely accepted among political philosophers and thoughtful lawyers.➁ In political theory the distinction comes to this. We must distinguish two very different questions. Both assume that government, at least of and by human beings, is inevitably coercive. The first asks: By whom—and with whom—should I be coerced? The second asks: How much should I be coerced?

A political theory calls for positive liberty if it insists, in response to the first question, that people must be permitted to play a role in their own coercive governance: that government must in some sense or another be self-government. A theory calls for negative liberty if it insists, in response to the second question, that people must be free of coercive government over some substantial range of their decisions and activities. Both these ideas—of positive and negative liberty—are initially puzzling. How can coercive government by a group larger than a single person be self-government for everyone? If coercive government is legitimate at all, then how can we carve out some area of decision and activity that government has no right to regulate?

The second principle of dignity explains why we should regard answers to these two questions, which seem so different, as both theories of liberty. People must be allowed responsibility for their own lives, and, as I said when we considered political obligation in Chapter 14, that responsibility is compatible with governance by others only when certain conditions are met. I described those conditions abstractly there. First, everyone must be permitted to participate in the right way in the collective decisions that make up his governance, and second, everyone must be left free from collective decision in matters that his personal responsibility demands he decide for himself. Because responsibility has those two dimensions, so does liberty. A theory of positive liberty stipulates what it means for people to participate in the right way. It offers, that is, a conception of self-government. A theory of negative liberty describes which choices must be exempt from collective decisions if personal responsibility is to be preserved. The latter is the question for this chapter; the former for the next one. Henceforth I use “liberty” to mean negative liberty unless the context requires a distinction from positive liberty.

Must They Conflict?

One preliminary remains. It is a popular idea, defended in those famous essays, that these two kinds of liberty may conflict with one another, so that a choice or compromise between them is necessary. Of course, conflict is certainly possible and perhaps likely if a community pursues a mistaken conception of either positive or negative liberty or both. Berlin pointed out that the goal of positive liberty has been used by totalitarians to call for a political regime that oppresses citizens in the name of their supposed true or higher interests, interests that they do not recognize for themselves. When the ideal of self-government is corrupted in some such way, it can be used to justify appalling violations of negative liberty. A totalitarian will muzzle people or shut them up in jails or kill them to save their better souls. But so corrupted, the idea has nothing to do with personal responsibility; on the contrary, it plainly violates rather than serves the second principle of dignity. It cannot serve as even an eligible conception of liberty. Berlin’s history warns us that bad philosophy is dangerous, but it does not show that better philosophy must end in conflict.

Berlin thought that conflict was likely even on a correct understanding of both concepts. “Both [positive and negative liberty] are ends in themselves. These ends may clash irreconcilably … Should democracy in a given situation be promoted at the expense of individual freedom?”➂ He assumed, rightly, that positive liberty requires some form of democracy. But why should promoting democracy, which requires a range of personal freedoms, be thought to conflict with negative liberty? True, there are times and places in which democratic government is so weak and unstable that some constraint on freedom of political activity is thought necessary to prevent antidemocratic forces from destroying it. But such constraints are as much injuries to democracy itself as they are to negative liberty: these are circumstances in which—allegedly—both democracy and negative liberty must be compromised immediately to protect both from graver loss later, not cases in which one of these virtues is preferred to another.

Berlin thought conflict between the two forms of liberty inevitable for a different reason: because he held a problematic view not of positive but of negative liberty. I need a terminological stipulation to explain his view. Though the terms “liberty” and “freedom” are sometimes used interchangeably, I shall distinguish them in the following way. Someone’s total freedom is his power to act in whatever way he might wish, unimpeded by constraints or threats imposed by others or by a political community. His negative liberty is the area of his freedom that a political community cannot take away without injuring him in a special way: compromising his dignity by denying him equal concern or an essential feature of responsibility for his own life.

Berlin treated total freedom and negative liberty as coextensive, so that any limit to the former is an invasion of the latter. (This was Mill’s conception too, and that of many other philosophers: H. L. A. Hart, for instance, among others.➃) This equation of liberty with freedom cannot be defended by supposing that liberty is a criterial concept and that our shared criteria for its application have that consequence. Liberty is not criterial: people who debate whether taxation limits our liberty patently use different criteria. We make sense of such disagreement only by assuming, as I now have, that liberty is an interpretive concept and that we understand its meaning best when we tie it to the deeper value of personal responsibility. In any case our question now is whether liberty and democracy conflict as values, not just as phenomena, and only by connecting liberty to dignity in that way can we treat liberty as a value.

So we should treat the equation of liberty with freedom as Berlin’s conception of liberty as a value. If that conception is sound—it if realizes what is good about liberty—then of course democracy conflicts with liberty, because any form of government, including democracy, is impossible without criminal law and other forms of regulation. It must follow that good government is inevitably a matter of compromise: any government must compromise one good—liberty—in order to achieve others. But this interpretation is not sound: government does not compromise its citizens’ dignity when it forbids them to kill one another. Certainly it is regrettable when people are punished for disobeying the law: it harms those who are punished, and it ought to dismay those who do the punishing. It is also regrettable when someone obeys the law only out of fear. It would no doubt be better if laws and citizens were both sufficiently just so that neither the threat nor the fact of coercion was ever necessary. But a collective decision to impose a duty not to kill and to threaten a serious sanction for any violation is not in itself an insult to the dignity of subjects.

On the contrary, your dignity as an equal citizen requires that government protect you in this way. It is not demeaning for you to accept that a majority of your fellow citizens has the right to fix traffic rules and enforce the rules they fix, provided that the rules they choose are not wicked or desperately foolish. Or that they have the right to define who owns what property and what rights and protections that ownership carries. However, it would certainly be demeaning for you to accept that even a large majority has the right to dictate your religious conviction or practice, or what opinions you should or should not express in political debates. You might be forced to obey those dictates as well, but you should not accept that they are legitimate or that you have a duty to accept them. Berlin’s equation fails to capture the difference between the two kinds of constraint. We must attempt a more complex interpretation that does.

We might be tempted by an amendment to Berlin’s equation: that liberty is not total freedom but substantial freedom. Laws invade liberty, on this view, when they seriously curtail freedom. But how can we measure the amount of freedom lost through any particular edict? A psychological test, like frustration, won’t do. What people find frustrating varies, and in any case, a great many people are more frustrated by speed limits than they would be by political censorship. We need a more radical shift: we need a more explicitly normative conception of liberty.

An Integrated Conception (368)

Dignity Again

We turn once again to our two principles of dignity. These principles are now richer in content than when we encountered them first in Chapter 9. We have steadily elaborated and refined them through our study of ethics, then personal morality, political obligation, and political legitimacy, and then, in our study of distributive equality, how government properly melds equal concern with full respect. We began with an inchoate sense of dignity and worried that it might be too flaccid for our purpose, as some commentators have suggested. Our conception of dignity has much more content now. Can it help us to define liberty? If so, we will have integrated that important political value with the others we have been exploring.

Ethical Independence

We return to a distinction we made in a discussion of ethical independence in Chapter 9: between what a government may not do to its citizens for any reason and what it may not do to them for certain reasons. Some coercive laws violate ethical independence because they deny people power to make their own decisions about matters of ethical foundation—about the basis and character of the objective importance of human life that the first principle of dignity declares. These include choices in religion and in personal commitments of intimacy and to ethical, moral, and political ideals. A plurality of American Supreme Court justices, refusing to allow American states to flatly prohibit early abortion, called these “matters involving the most intimate and personal choices a person may make in a lifetime, choices central to dignity and autonomy.” People have a right to independence in such decisions, provided that they do not threaten the like independence of other people. So government may not constrain foundational independence for any reason except when this is necessary to protect the life, security, or liberty of others. Which other decisions are also foundational, if any, is open to dispute. But any more detailed account of liberty must take a stand on that issue.

Other laws violate ethical independence in virtue, not of the foundational character of the decisions they inhibit, but rather of government’s motives in enacting those laws. Government must not restrict freedom when its justification assumes the superiority or popularity of any ethical values controversial in the community. Censorship of sexual literature or mandated flag salutes or other demonstrations of patriotism fall into that category, because they depend, directly or indirectly, on a choice about the personal virtues that a good life reflects. Some laws violate ethical independence in both ways. Prohibitions on same-sex intercourse or marriage constrain foundational choices, and they are almost always motivated by a desire to protect some conceptions of living well and blot out others. Political censorship may also violate independence in both ways. The freedom to speak or write honestly as your conscience or conviction or belief requires is foundational. In some circumstances, moreover, political censorship can be justified only by ethical assumptions.

But ethical independence is not jeopardized when a matter is not foundational and government’s constraint assumes no ethical justification. Government relies on moral rather than ethical arguments when it pressures me to conserve scarce resources, forces me to pay taxes, and forbids me to drive carelessly. Certainly laws that do not offend ethical independence—in either of the two ways—may nevertheless have serious consequence for how people can live. Prohibiting physical violence and theft makes it less likely that I will judge the life of a Samurai or Robin Hood ideal for me and much more difficult for me to pursue that life if I do. Taxation makes it less likely that I will judge collecting Renaissance masterpieces the ideal life. None of these laws denies my responsibility to define ethical value for myself, however, because none aims to usurp my responsibility to identify a successful life. Properly motivated laws of my community are part of the background against which I make my ethical choices. My own ethical responsibility for making those choices is not diminished by that background.

Much of the philosophical literature about paternalism seems to me to underrate the importance of this distinction. Making people wear seat belts to prevent or mitigate injury is not ethical paternalism: medical paternalism may be offensive, but it is not an offense against authenticity. True, many people claim (perhaps a few of them sincerely) that a life that courts danger is attractive and that seat-belt legislation restricts people’s opportunity to lead such a life. But seat-belt convictions are not foundational, and government need not assume that courting danger is a bad way to live in order to justify measures that reduce the costs of accidents to the community. It used to be easy to cite real cases of ethical paternalism: the Inquisition, for instance, was firmly in that line of work. Even during part of the last century the most popular arguments for censoring pornography appealed to ethical paternalism. The great Oxford bookseller, Basil Blackwell, testified that Last Exit to Brooklyn should be banned because it degraded those who read it; he then offered himself as an example of someone who had become depraved in that way.➄ But ethical paternalism has had a bad press in recent decades, and it is no longer a popular political cause.

Instead the most popular arguments for constraints once justified in that way now cite fairness, not ethical paternalism. They insist that people who form a political majority have a right to the ethical culture they deem best: they have a right to live and raise their children in a culture that permits and encourages a lifestyle they admire.➅ It is much easier for people to hew to their inherited religion with the almost blind conviction and fervor they long to achieve, and to transmit their own intense faith to their children, when that faith is officially endorsed and celebrated; it is harder when competing religions and triumphal atheism have equal voice. It is easier to feel comfortable in conservative attitudes to sex when striking sexual images are not freely available on magazine covers or dominant in advertising. Why, then, should the majority not be able to impose the religious or sexual culture it prefers on everyone? It has the right, within reasonable limits, to protect what it deems to have impersonal value by taxing for museums and forbidding despoliation of forests. It may forbid me to build a skyscraper on my land or put billboards or plastic flamingoes on my lawn. Why should it not be permitted to protect in the same way the religious and sexual culture it favors?

We need arguments like those of this book—the distinctions and interconnections among responsibility, authenticity, influence, and subordination that we have reviewed—properly to answer that question. The second principle of dignity makes ethics special: it limits the acceptable range of collective decision. We cannot escape the influence of our ethical environment: we are subject to the examples, exhortations, and celebrations of other people’s ideas about how to live.➆ But we must insist that that environment be created under the aegis of ethical independence: that it be created organically by the decisions of millions of people with the freedom to make their own choices, not through political majorities imposing their decisions on everyone.

I proposed an image in Chapter 13: of people swimming in their own lanes who may cross into someone else’s lane to help but not to harm him. Morality, broadly understood, defines the lanes that separate swimmers. It stipulates when one must cross lanes to help and what constitutes forbidden lane-crossing harm. Ethics governs how one must swim in one’s own lane to have swum well. The image is helpful here again because it illustrates one way in which morality must be treated as prior to ethics in politics: it must be treated as prior in defining what opportunities and resources people are rightfully entitled to have, and in that way to establishing what rights they have to liberty. The interpretive conception of liberty we are now constructing explains why that philosophical fact entails no subordination of either morality or ethics to the other. They cooperate, not compete.

Other Liberty: Due Process, Free Speech

Certain rights are by tradition called “liberal.” These include rights I have so far cited—freedom of religious practice and of political speech—but also such different rights as the right to leave the community and “due process” right not to be punished for an alleged crime without a trial conducted with proper procedural safeguards against convicting innocent people. Liberal rights are widely accepted in the abstract, at least in Western democracies, but they are controversial in detail. Lawyers and nations disagree to a considerable extent about whether, for example, the right to free speech includes a right to advertise cigarettes or a right to spend unlimited sums in political campaigns, and whether due process rights include a right to a jury trial or a privilege against self-incrimination. What arguments are available for these rights, either in the abstract or in some controversial specification?

The right to religious freedom is obviously grounded in ethical independence; I return to that right and its implications later in this chapter. Due process rights, on the other hand, seem to have little to do with ethical responsibility: we have those rights in virtue of government’s obligation, flowing from the first principle of dignity, to treat each person’s life as of distinct, objective, and equal importance. I have tried to explain elsewhere why punishing an innocent person inflicts a special and great harm on him—I called it a moral harm—and why that fact justifies the assumption that, in the popular slogan, it is better that a thousand guilty people go free than that one innocent one be punished.➇ It is a nice calculation, in which history and tradition have a part to play, how much expense a community must incur to avoid that terrible injury. But a community that is careless of proof or niggardly in protecting against error—and of course any community that countenances deliberate conviction of the innocent—violates the first principle of human dignity.

The right to free speech, which is equally central in the traditional account of liberal rights, requires more nuanced treatment.➈ It is now very widely accepted among American constitutional lawyers that the First Amendment, which forbids government to abridge “the freedom of speech,” is justified by a variety of principles and purposes. One important set of these is grounded in positive liberty. Free speech must be part of any defensible conception of self-government for at least two distinct and equally important reasons: self-government requires free access to information, and government is not legitimate, and so has no moral title to coerce, unless all those coerced have had an opportunity to influence collective decisions. (We consider these two claims further in the next chapter.)

But free speech, as it has come to be understood in Western democracies, covers more than political speech even broadly construed: we must take more into account than positive liberty to explain all that it covers—and does not cover. Though a state may in different ways promote what it collectively deems intrinsically valuable in literature, art, and music, it may not forbid its members to read, look at, and listen to what they please when its only justification is that certain opinions about what is worthy of enjoyment are offensive in themselves and may be contagious. Sexually explicit material is protected by a right to free speech, not because it expresses a political position—that is far-fetched—but because the only available arguments for banning it are, as I said, offensive to ethical independence.

Censorship might not only undermine positive liberty but also, as I said, violate the right of ethical independence in both the ways we distinguished. Consider how a variety of factors interact when government tries to ban hate speech. Ohio courts convicted a Ku Klux Klan leader of a crime because he had advocated hatred of blacks and Jews.➉ The law so interpreted violated his right to positive liberty because it prohibited him from attempting to rally other citizens to his political opinions. It violated his right to ethical independence because the right to bear public witness to one’s political convictions is foundational and any violence to others he advocated was not imminent. It violated his ethical independence in a different way if, as seems likely, the prosecution was motivated not by fear of violence but by wholly justified revulsion at his lower esteem for the importance of certain lives. The Supreme Court reversed the conviction, but I cite the example not to illustrate American constitutional law but to show the confluence of aspects of both positive and negative liberty at work, honorably, to protect the rights of the detestable.

We should distinguish these liberty-based arguments, which appeal to positive or negative liberty or both, from policy-based arguments for free speech. Mill, Oliver Wendell Holmes, and others stressed the value of unrestricted speech as a source of knowledge. Holmes, who loved evolutionary images, expressed it by saying that better ideas have a better chance of surviving in an intense Darwinian competition from which no thought, however unattractive or implausible, is initially excluded. This may well be true on the whole and over some very long run, though less plainly so in matters of political morality and aesthetic taste than in science. A second policy-based argument focuses on commercial speech: the public has an important economic interest in a free flow of information about the availability, price, and features of products offered for sale. The Supreme Court has developed an elaborate and unimpressive jurisprudence about the degree to which the First Amendment protects commercial speech from regulation. The upshot of its wandering decisions is that commercial speech has some constitutional protection but not as much as political speech.

It is commonplace that no political right is absolute and that even free speech has its limits. But the character and justification of these limits differs, depending on which of the justifications for the right I mentioned is in play. The policy-based arguments suggest their own limits. The public has at best a dubious economic interest in reading false or misleading advertisements, for example, or in advertisements that do not include reasonable warnings about the dangers of the products they advertise, or advertisements for illegal activities. Such advertisements are on balance not helpful but harmful to the public interest.

The liberty-based arguments of both kinds suggest their own limits in a different way: because the justification they offer is not engaged at all on certain occasions. I have argued (I summarize that argument in the next chapter) that reasonable limits on a candidate’s expenditures in political campaigns do not cramp positive liberty. On the contrary, they enhance it because they help provide something at least closer to self-government for all citizens than politics can drenched in money and dominated by rich candidates and backers. The case for free speech drawn from ethical independence is self-limiting in the same way. When government forbids conspiring with confederates in crime, it does not constrain a foundational right. Nor does it act to vindicate some collective judgment of worthy behavior or to impose some uniform orthodoxy in ethics. It acts to improve safety; its motives, like its motives in taxation or economic regulation, are moral, not ethical.

This brisk review of free speech and its limits is not legal analysis: it does not confront the hard cases that a court charged with enforcing a constitutional right faces. Higher courts must draw reasonably rigid distinctions that can serve as a guide to lower courts and other departments of government. I mean here only to illustrate the different dimensions of argument that are required, on this conception of liberty, both to defend and limit this famous right.

Freedom of Property?

I have not yet mentioned a kind of freedom that is dear to conservative hearts and much celebrated in certain periods of American history: freedom to acquire property and use it as one wishes, except to harm other people. Is this freedom a liberty too? It is the freedom people have in mind when they claim that financial and industrial regulation strikes at liberty and that taxation is tyranny. These claims are no doubt exaggerated, but should we not recognize some liberty of this sort?

We already have. Some liberty to acquire and use property is assumed in the conception of distributive justice defined in Chapter 16: equality of resources. Some liberty of that sort is assumed, indeed, in any conception of distributive justice. For the resources people have cannot be defined or measured without taking into account people’s freedom to acquire, trade, and use those resources as they wish. It would make no sense to urge an equal distribution of wealth, however equality is conceived, without assuming some kind or degree of such freedom, because bare ownership of some property means nothing unless we specify or assume a general background of freedom in its use. Ownership, lawyers say, is a bundle of rights, and we make assumptions about the contents of that bundle whenever we specify any distribution of resources as fair.

What the bundle of rights should contain is not, however, an independent question that belongs exclusively to a study of liberty. The right bundle obviously depends on the rest of political morality as well. The most we can say here is that your liberty includes the right to use property that is rightfully yours, except in ways your government can rightfully restrict. That proposition is not as anodyne as it sounds when it is integrated into the right general theory of justice. The opportunity-cost justification of equality of resources I defended assumes a very wide latitude of alienable ownership and control, and so does the second principle of dignity, which asks us to take responsibility for our own lives.⑪

Some resources must inevitably be held as public goods, and others should be under public control to protect against the externalities that corrupt the opportunity-costs metric. Some strict regulation is necessary for the same reason—pollution controls, for example—and some public programs, like a health care system, are necessary as the most efficient forms of redistribution in search of fairness. But the default required by equal concern and respect is a system of private property: we need a justification for any deviation from that default. The familiar right-wing complaint that taxation is an assault on liberty is mistaken. But the mistake is not conceptual: it is a mistake about justice. The structure and level of taxation in force may invade liberty if it is unjust—if it does not show equal concern and respect for all. Taxation in many countries now is unjust, but because it takes too little, not too much. It does not deprive people of what is rightfully theirs; on the contrary, it fails to provide the means of granting them what is rightfully theirs.

Religious Freedom and Ethical Independence

A right to religious freedom is plainly required by ethical independence. It has pride of place in the United States Constitution and in documents like the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the European Convention on Human Rights. True, other justifications beyond dignity have been offered for that right. It is said, for example, that because religion is particularly divisive, religious tolerance is the only route to civil peace. But though that justification was cogent in Europe and America in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, it is much less cogent now. The main beneficiaries of tolerance in the West now are small minority religions and people with no religion at all, and they would not and could not provoke much civic disturbance if they were denied the freedoms they now enjoy. In certain other countries one religion is established as official and other religions are tolerated only barely, or not at all, without any apparent danger to stability. For us, now, dignity provides the only available justification for freedom of religious thought and practice.

But once we accept that proposition, we can no longer consistently think, as many people do, that religion is special and that other foundational ethical choices—about reproduction, marriage, and sexual orientation, for instance—may properly be subject to collective decision. We cannot declare a right to religious freedom and then reject rights to freedom of choice in these other foundational matters without striking self-contradiction. For if we insist that no particular religion be treated as special in politics, then we cannot treat religion itself as special in politics, as more central to dignity than sexual identification, for example. So we must not treat religious freedom as sui generis. It is only one consequence of the more general right to ethical independence in foundational matters. Government needs a compelling justification to regulate reproductive or sexual acts, and its justification may not rely on either the truth or the popularity of a collective ethical judgment. I have written at length elsewhere about some of these ethical issues and return to them here, though only briefly, to consider what fresh light the argument of this book throws on them.⑫

Abortion is the most complex as well as the most divisive of these issues. The first principle of dignity holds that human life is of intrinsic importance, and that principle necessarily includes the life of a human fetus, which is undeniably a human life. Earlier in the book we recognized dual consequences of that first principle. Each of us must live so as to acknowledge and respect the objective importance of his own life. We fail in dignity when we do not. And we must treat others consistently with recognizing the objective importance of their lives as well. It is a further question, however, what that latter requirement means more concretely. In earlier chapters we considered how far respect for human life requires that we aid other people and when it requires that we not harm them. Do these moral requirements shift when human life has only just begun? Do we owe an early fetus the same duty to aid and not to harm that we owe human beings who have reached a more complex state of development?

These are moral as well as ethical questions: the morality of abortion hinges on how we answer them. I have argued that we must answer the second: no. Because an early fetus has no interests of its own, any more than a flower does, a fetus cannot be supposed to have rights protecting its interests. In fact, very few people actually believe that we owe the same moral duty to a fetus that we owe to an infant: even most people who think that abortion should be prohibited in principle nevertheless believe it should be permitted when a pregnancy has begun in rape or when abortion is necessary to save a woman’s life. But even if we accept that negative answer to the moral question, and hold that a woman has no moral duty not to abort the fetus she carries, critical ethical issues remain. For it remains a vivid possibility that abortion is nevertheless inconsistent with the respect for human life on which our dignity depends. Paintings and great trees have no interests of their own, and hence no moral rights to protect their interests, but it is still inconsistent with recognizing their intrinsic value to destroy them. That is why it is crucial, in discussing abortion and related issues, to take care to distinguish the moral from the ethical issues in play.

The moral question must be decided collectively within a political community. When the United States Supreme Court was asked, for the first time in 1973, whether an American state can constitutionally forbid all abortion, it had to answer that moral question one way or the other. It answered it negatively. Many critics of the decision insist that the Court should not have decided the question at all but should rather have allowed the states to decide it for themselves one by one. That objection is confused: states cannot be allowed to decide for themselves whether any particular class of their members may be murdered. It is a more sensible objection that, having decided that abortion is not murder and that states are therefore not required by the Constitution’s equal protection clause to prohibit all abortion, the Court should have allowed them to decide for themselves whether abortion should be banned on ethical grounds—on the ground, that is, that abortion displays contempt for the intrinsic value of human life. That was the crucial issue that the Court actually faced in Roe v. Wade, and faced again, with a more accurate recognition and better response, in the later Casey case in which it reaffirmed its support for limited abortion rights.⑬

The right of ethical independence allows only one answer. That right is violated and liberty denied when government restricts freedom in order to enforce a collective ethical judgment—in this instance the ethical judgment that a woman who aborts an early pregnancy does not show the respect for human life that her dignity demands. I myself believe that in many circumstances abortion is indeed an act of self-contempt.⑭ A woman betrays her own dignity when she aborts for frivolous reasons: to avoid rescheduling a holiday, for instance. I would reach a different ethical judgment in other cases: when a teenage girl’s prospects for a decent life would be ruined if she became a single mother, for example. But whether the judgment is right or wrong in any particular case, it remains an ethical, not a moral judgment. It must be left to women, as their dignity demands, each to take responsibility for her own ethical convictions.

===============================================================================

➀ Benjamin Constant, “The Liberty of the Ancients Compared with That of the Moderns” (1819), in Biancamaria Fontana, trans., Political Writings (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988), 309–28; Isaiah Berlin, “Two Concepts of Liberty” (1958), reprinted in Four Essays on Liberty (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1969), 118–72.

➁ Charles Fried, Modern Liberty and the Limits of Government (New York: W. W. Norton, 2006); Stephen Breyer, Active Liberty: Interpreting Our Democratic Constitution (New York: Knopf, 2005).

➂ Berlin, Four Essays on Liberty, xlix.

➃ H. L. A. Hart, “Are There Any Natural Rights?” Philosophical Review 64 (1955).

➄ See Nicholas Clee, “And Another Thing … Morality in Book Publishing,” Logos 10 (1999): 118, 119.

➅ See my discussion of Edwin Baker’s version of this argument in Chapter 16.

➆ James Fleming raises, among other important matters, the question of how government may attempt to influence citizens’ ethical opinions and decisions by means short of coercion. As the text reflects, I try to distinguish between a community’s moral and ethical environments. I do not believe government shows the right respect for individual ethical responsibility when it officially endorses one opinion, controversial among citizens, about what counts as a good life. But as I emphasized in Life’s Dominion (New York: Knopf, 1993), government does not deny respect for ethical responsibility when it acts to improve people’s sense of the gravity of that responsibility. Nor does it by designing compulsory public education to emphasize that gravity and to display imaginatively a range of important and profound responses to it. As Fleming points out, these distinctions require difficult boundary judgments distinguishing government programs aimed to heighten ethical responsibility from those either endorsing or coercing particular choices. But if the distinction reflects important principles, as I think it does, then we must make those judgments as best we can. Fleming notes the distinction I make in Life’s Dominion between arguments inside-out and outside-in. Though the structure of this book may suggest the latter, I tried to show, in the advance summary of Chapter 1, that its underlying structure is inside-out.

➇ See “Principle, Policy, Procedure,” in my book A Matter of Principle (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1985), chapter 3. This article is discussed by Robert Bone in “Procedure, Participation, Rights,” in Symposium: Justice for Hedgehogs: A Conference on Ronald Dworkin’s Forthcoming Book (special issue), Boston University Law Review 90, no. 2 (April 2010): 1011.

➈ I have somewhat lengthened this discussion of free speech from an earlier draft to respond to fears Edwin Baker expressed in the article discussed in Chapter 16 that my defense was not full-throated and did not give liberty pride of place. No value has pride of place in an integrated account of them all, since each relies on the others. But I mean this defense to be full-throated.

➉ Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 U.S. 444 (1969).

⑪ See my Sovereign Virtue, chapter 3, “The Place of Liberty.”

⑫ Life’s Dominion. I mean to incorporate the argument of that book here and only summarize its main conclusions.

⑬ Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973); Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833 (1992).

⑭ I emphasize that this must be treated as an ethical issue rather than one about protecting impersonal values like great paintings or natural trea sures. Government may properly tax its citizens to fund museums, but not conscript them to guard works of art themselves at great personal cost. The case for prohibiting abortion must include the distinctly ethical judgment that even an early abortion reflects a mistaken understanding of the character of life’s importance.

===============================================================================

Key concepts:

ethical independence (368): laws that deny people power to make their own decisions about matters of ethical foundation violate ethical independence; or in virtue of government’s motives in enacting those laws

ethical vs. moral: sexual orientation, abortion, etc.

freedom (366)

liberty (365): negative liberty

negative liberty (365): people must be free of coercive government over some substantial range of their decisions and activities

positive liberty (365): self-government