18 Democracy (379)

Positive Liberty

Slogans and Questions

The second principle of dignity protects personal ethical responsibility. In the last chapter we studied one aspect of that responsibility. Dignity requires independence from government in matters of ethical choice, and that requirement is at the foundation of any plausible theory of negative liberty. But dignity does not require independence from government in other matters: a political community must make collective decisions about justice and morality, and it must be able to enforce those decisions coercively. That sets the stage for the question of positive liberty. I cannot be free from coercive control in matters of justice and morality, but my dignity requires that I be allowed a role in the collective decisions that exercise that control. What role must that be?

We are soon knee-deep in slogans. Only democracy can provide dignity. Government must be of the people, by the people, and for the people. The people must govern themselves. Each citizen must be offered an equal and meaningful role. One person must have one vote and no one more than one vote. No man, Locke said, is born to rule or be ruled.➀ We must try to rescue positive liberty from these slogans because it is wholly unclear what they mean. The concept of democracy is an interpretive and much contested concept. What can it mean that “the people” govern themselves when very few of them have any significant power over what the laws will be? The winner-takes-all style of electing parliamentary representatives in each electoral district, common in the United States and Britain, is very different from the proportional representation system common in other countries. Given the same distribution of interests, convictions, and preferences, rather different laws are likely to emerge, depending on which of these two systems is in place. Is one system more democratic than the other? Is the practice of judicial review, which allows judges appointed for life to declare legislative and executive acts unconstitutional, illegitimate because it is undemocratic? Or is that practice rather a necessary and desirable corrective to democracy? Or—a third possibility—is the practice actually essential to creating a genuine democracy? Each of these positions is widely defended, and we cannot choose among them without choosing among conceptions of democracy and defending our choice.

Who Are the People?

We face a further, threshold question before we can tackle those traditional questions. Who are the people? One day Japan grants equal voting rights to the citizens of Norway so that they can elect a small party of Norwegians to the Japanese Diet if they wish. Then the Diet by majority vote levies taxes on Norwegian oil and directs its transfer to Japanese refineries. This fantasy would hardly supply self-government to the Norwegians. If some form of majoritarian process is to provide genuine self-government, it must be government by a majority of the right people.

Government by the right people has seemed more important to more people—to the peoples of Africa following the Second World War, for instance, or the white citizens of the antebellum American South—than their role as individuals in that government. People want to be governed by people relatively like themselves. It is often unclear what that means. It has been taken to justify many different forms of tribalism or nationalism: of race, religion, language, kinship, or even, as in the Old South, economic circumstance or interest. Historians, statesmen, and politicians cannot ignore the strength of these various centripetal forces: they continue to drive people into the most terrible violence. But they have no intrinsic normative force. There is no nonhistorical right answer to the question: on what principle should people be divided into political communities? We cannot find an answer in the ideal of democracy itself because that ideal presupposes a political community and cannot be used to define one. Nor in the emotionally powerful but terminally vague idea of national self-determination—the supposed right of ethnocultural groups to govern themselves. There is no concept of nonpolitical nationhood precise enough to make sense of that right, and even if there were, there is no satisfactory answer to the question why any individual member of any group so defined has a duty to associate himself politically with the rest of them.

There are indeed reasons—sometimes imperative reasons—for altering historical or established patterns of rule. Colonial systems in which the people of one political state governed other peoples far away could not have been reformed without severing that formal association and creating new states. Though the patriots who dumped tea into Boston Harbor shouted “No taxation without representation,” Jefferson’s Declaration of Independence did not suggest extending the Westminster franchise as a solution to King George’s crimes, and no one thought, a century or two on, that franchise extension would end colonial empire in Africa or on the Indian subcontinent.

Even when there is no colonial domination to undo, the boundaries that geography, history, war, and politics have created may be untenable. When different tribes or races or religious groups prove incapable of living together without violence, separation into new political communities may be the only available alternative. Or if one minority group has become a perennial victim of injustice, a reformulation of boundaries may help, provided of course that this can be achieved without more injustice and without great suffering. When an illegitimate conquest—Saddam’s incursion into Kuwait, for instance—can be undone, it must be undone. But a plausible statute of limitations provides a necessary limit even to that principle, so that even if it was wrong to establish Israel sixty years ago, the original boundaries of that state should now be respected.

These are examples of dramatic change in political boundaries. Less dramatic changes and regroupings are often wise and can normally be achieved with little or much less pain. Federalism and decentralization, creating subdivisions of established communities, often permit more rational political decisions and provide a greater sense of participation in self-government. Shifts in the other direction can be even more valuable: the now long-running and so far disappointing efforts to create a new constitutional structure for the European Union illustrate both the wisdom and the difficulty of a shift to larger and more diverse political communities from smaller and more homogeneous ones. Both the European nations and the world will gain, I believe, if the EU is able to form a common foreign policy and execute it with the economic power of its community giving strength to its united arm.

Still, the boundaries created by accidents of history remain the default. We are born into political communities and these are our legitimate governors, provided they also meet the conditions of legitimacy discussed earlier in this book and later in this chapter, which include imposing no legal barriers to emigration. Those who live a mile inside California’s border with Nevada or France’s border with Germany are governed rather differently from those who live a mile on the other side, and no abstract principle of political philosophy can justify that difference. Most attempts to draw supposedly more rational lines only create new uncomfortable minorities to replace newly comfortable old ones. If we rule out a one-world global democracy with one vote for everyone in every continent (which is impossible and would in any case raise all the old questions when the necessary subdivisions were created), we rarely find a persuasive argument for correcting what history has achieved.

Two Models of Self-Government

Assume, then, that some particular political community is the right community or at least not the wrong one. The right people govern. They govern by electing officials of various kinds and levels, and these officials exercise coercive power on their behalf. But the officials can be elected and the structures through which they govern constructed in a variety of ways: the systems we recognize as democratic across the world vary significantly. Some reserve major decisions for referenda in which people at large vote directly on matters of policy; others shun such referenda. Some elect officials more frequently than others, some use proportional representation and others winner-takes-all electoral schemes, some give considerable power to nonelected officials, including the judges of constitutional courts. By what principles should we judge these different constitutional arrangements? Are some more consistent with the dignity of the people than others? Do some provide more, and others less, by way of positive liberty or genuine self-government? Is there some deep standard we can use to test these various versions of democracy for democratic superiority or authenticity?

Democracy, to repeat yet again, is an interpretive concept: people disagree about what democracy is. We choose among competing conceptions by locating some distinct value or set of values that best explain, if any can, what is good about it. As always, some philosophers are tempted by a reductive solution: they suggest giving up the debate about what democracy is and arguing instead simply about what form of government is best. As always, that reductive strategy is self-defeating; it forces us to ignore important distinctions between different values at stake in that latter, overall, question. A good government is democratic, just, and efficient, but these are not the same qualities, and it is sometimes important to ask, for instance, whether some constitutional arrangement that is likely to make a community’s economy more efficient must nevertheless be resisted because it is undemocratic. It is then crucial to consider, as an independent question, what we should understand the point and nerve of democracy to be. We can avoid the word if we wish: we can ask about the meaning of positive liberty or self-government instead. But we ask the same question.

It is instructive to contrast two answers to that question: two models of how people can be thought to govern themselves. I have elsewhere called these the majoritarian and partnership conceptions of democracy.➁ The majoritarian conception holds that people govern themselves when the largest number of them, rather than some smaller group within them, holds fundamental political power. It therefore insists that the structures of representative government should be designed to enhance the likelihood that the community’s laws and policies will be those that the largest number of citizens, after due discussion and reflection, prefer. Elections should be frequent enough so that officials will be encouraged to do what most people want; federal units and parliamentary districts should be drawn, and constitutional power divided among types and levels of officials, with that aim in view. Further questions—referenda? proportional representation?—should be debated and decided in the same way. Which system is more likely to reliably enforce the reflective and settled will of a majority of citizens in the long run?

We must take care not to confuse this majoritarian conception of democracy with some aggregative theory of justice, like utilitarianism, that holds that laws are just when they produce the greatest possible sum or average of happiness (or some other conception of well-being) within a targeted community. (The phrase “majority will” is dangerously ambiguous because it is sometimes used to describe a majoritarian process and sometimes a utilitarian or other aggregative result.➂ ) There is no reason to think that a majoritarian electoral process will even typically produce a result that would be deemed just on any particular aggregative standard. On the contrary, a majoritarian process might well produce—and often has produced—laws that injure total or average well-being on any conception of what that is. That is why proponents of the majoritarian conception believe it important to distinguish democracy from justice. An autocrat might decree a more just distribution of resources than a majority would approve.

The partnership conception of democracy is different: it holds that self-government means government not by the majority of people exercising authority over everyone but by the people as a whole acting as partners. This must inevitably be a partnership that divides over policy, of course, since unanimity is rare in political communities of any size. But it can be a partnership nevertheless if the members accept that in politics they must act with equal respect and concern for all the other partners. It can be a partnership, that is, if they each respect the conditions of legitimacy we discussed in Chapters 14 and 15—if each accepts a standing obligation not only to obey the community’s law but to try to make that law consistent with his good-faith understanding of what every citizen’s dignity requires.➃

That brief description reveals the most important difference between the two conceptions of democracy. The majoritarian conception defines democracy only procedurally. The partnership conception ties democracy to the substantive constraints of legitimacy. Because legitimacy is a matter of degree, so, on this conception, is democracy. It is an ideal toward which some political communities strive, some more successfully than others. But the partnership conception makes self-government at least an intelligible ideal. The majoritarian conception—or so I shall argue—does not, because it describes nothing that could count as self-government by members of a political minority. Or, for that matter, by individual members of a majority.

This profound contrast between the two conceptions is strikingly illustrated in the debate (principally in the United States but increasingly elsewhere) about the compatibility of democracy and judicial review. The majoritarian conception does not automatically rule out a political arrangement that gives judges the power to enforce a constitution by declaring legislation null and void. Some skilled lawyers and philosophers have argued that judicial review, properly designed and limited, can serve the majoritarian conception by making it more likely that legislation will reflect the settled view of most people. John Hart Ely argued, for instance, that judges must protect the people’s power by safeguarding freedom of speech and the press from politicians anxious to hide their corruption or stupidity, and Janos Kis has argued, in the same vein, that judges can protect the people from incumbents who become less enthusiastic about majority will when this is a threat to their continued power.➄

Still, the majoritarian conception is wary of judicial review, and its acolytes reject judicial power to strike down laws that a steady and informed majority plainly favors: the death penalty, for instance, or prayer in public schools, or, in some American states, restrictions on early abortion. They understand that it is controversial whether a political majority should have the power to adopt such legislation. But they insist that because that question is controversial, the majority must be permitted to decide the question for itself. Allowing a small group of lawyers who cannot be dismissed in any general election to decide that fundamental question of governance is contrary to the whole point of majoritarian democracy. On that view, judicial review denies the positive liberty necessary to the dignity of ordinary citizens.➅

On the partnership conception, however, that familiar argument is starkly circular. It assumes that a political majority has moral authority to decide controversial issues for everyone, but on the partnership conception a majority has no moral authority to decide anything unless the institutions through which it governs are sufficiently legitimate. Judicial review is one possible (though I emphasize, only one possible) strategy for improving a government’s legitimacy—by protecting a minority’s ethical independence, for instance—and in that way securing a majority’s moral title to impose its will on other matters.

Which Model Is Best? (385)

Fairness?

How shall we choose between these two conceptions of democracy? Political scientists list many instrumental benefits of democracy. It is widely assumed that democratic institutions, backed by a free and vigorous press, protect a community against deep and extended corruption, tyranny, and other evils; they make it less likely that officials will govern only in their own interests or those of a narrow class, as military juntas and other dictators commonly do. Democracy has other, more positive advantages. In reasonably prosperous political communities, particularly those with an educated electorate and democratic traditions, democracy improves political stability; indeed, it may be essential to stability in such communities. It allows each of the important interest groups within the community to secure, through alliances and logrolling, what is most important to it. The political freedoms required by democracy also protect economic freedom and the rule of law essential to economic development. It is not obvious, alas, that these practical advantages can be realized in all circumstances. In some—in countries with very weak economies and no experience of democracy—introducing democracy may actually threaten stability or economic development. Or so some political theorists have argued. We need not pursue these issues here, however, because we cannot choose between the two models by asking which would produce more stability or prosperity. There is no general answer to that question—it entirely depends on circumstance—and the fundamental issue is anyway one of principle, not consequence.

We assume that people’s dignity requires that they participate in their own government. How does the majoritarian conception of democracy purport to achieve this? The answer may seem obvious: that majority rule is the only fair method of governing a coercive political community. Jeremy Waldron, among contemporary political theorists, has set out that case for the majoritarian conception, which he calls “MD,” with greatest clarity. “The fairness/equality defense of the majority-decision rule is well known,” he declared. “Better than any other rule, MD is neutral as between the contested outcomes, treats participants equally, and gives each expressed opinion the greatest weight possible compatible with giving equal weight to all opinions. When we disagree about the desired outcome, when we do not want to bias the matter up-front one way or another, and when each of the relevant participants has a moral claim to be treated as an equal in the process, then MD—or something like it—is the principle to use.”➆

This is a very general claim, not just about political decisions but about all collective decisions. It offers a general principle of procedural fairness. For people who accept that general principle, the majoritarian conception of democracy is only its application to the political case. I find the popularity of this argument surprising, however, because the majoritarian, counting-heads principle is rather plainly not a fundamental principle of fairness. There is first the problem I earlier discussed: a majority is in any case of no moral significance unless the community of which that group is a majority is the right community. A majority of Japanese and Norwegians has no moral power over Norwegian oil. But even when the community is the right one, majority decision is not always fair. I earlier gave this example: when a lifeboat is overcrowded and one passenger must be thrown over else all will die, it would not be fair to hold a vote so that the least popular among them would be drowned. It would be much fairer to draw lots.

Waldron has said, in response, that if the passengers disagreed about whether it would be fairer to draw lots or vote, then the only fair way to settle that dispute would be to vote on which procedure was fairer.➇ That recursive suggestion seems equally wrong: we cannot sensibly treat numbers as decisive over the question whether numbers should be decisive. It would not be any fairer for a majority of lifeboat passengers first to vote to hold an election and then to vote to throw the cabin boy out than for them to vote to throw him out directly. When questions of fair procedure are controversial, they are controversial all the way down: there is no default decision procedure to decide on decision procedures. (Waldron has recently given a fresh response to this claim.➈)

The evident reasons why a majority vote would be unfair in the lifeboat case apply also to at least some political decisions. Just as the biases and personal dislikes of a majority should not count in deciding which passenger should be thrown overboard, so they are not relevant when a political community decides on the rights of an identified and disliked minority.➉ In the lifeboat case there is an obvious remedy: chance. But chance would not be an appropriate decision procedure in politics. When decisions have vast consequences for the lives people lead, leaving those decisions to chance or some other form of oracle is a bad idea; it may have worked, for a time, for the Athenians, but it would not work for us. A majority’s opinion about whether to go to war may be no better than some minority’s opinion, but it is likely to be better than a decision made by dice.

There are also decisive reasons for rejecting an autocratic or investment-related procedure: citizens should not be treated like orchestra members or shareholders. Some of these reasons are practical: as I said, at least in many circumstances democracy provides stability and protects against corruption. Other reasons rest on assumptions about the outcome of democratic processes: they may be more likely than autocratic procedures to promote the general welfare, defined in some appropriate way, even if they do not do so inevitably. In any case, as we have seen, citizen’s dignity requires that they have an important role in their own governance. But none of these reasons for insisting on popular democracy rather than chance or aristocracy in politics favors the majoritarian over the partnership conception of what democracy means. Indeed, because the latter gives more constitutional protection to minorities, it might be expected to provide more stability and to more accurately identify and secure the general welfare.

Political Equality?

Must we say that the majoritarian conception offers something that the partnership conception does not—political equality? That depends on how that further interpretive concept is best understood. We can elaborate political equality as an abstract ideal in three very different ways. We might take political equality to mean, first, that political power is distributed in such a way that all adult citizens have equal influence over political decisions. Each of them has as great a chance as any other adult citizen that the opinions he brings to the political process will in the end become law or state policy. Or we might take political equality to mean, second, that adult citizens have equal impact in that process: that the opinion each finally forms in the process will be given full and equal weight in the community’s final decision. Influence and impact are different. A person’s influence includes his power to persuade or induce others to his side; his impact is limited to what he can achieve through his own opinion without regard to what others believe.

Third, we might take political equality to mean something quite different: that no adult citizen’s political impact is less than that of any other citizen for reasons that compromise his dignity—reasons that treat his life as of less concern or his opinions as less worthy of respect. The first two of these readings take equality to be a mathematical ideal: they presuppose some metric of political power and demand, at least as an ideal, that the power of all citizens be equal on that metric. The third takes political equality to be a matter of attitude, not mathematics. It demands that the community divide political power, not necessarily equally, but in a way that treats people as equals.

When we contrast the first two readings—equal influence and equal impact—it is difficult to think the latter a better interpretation. It makes no sense for me to think that my political power is equal to that of a billionaire or a pop star or a charismatic preacher or a revered political hero when many millions will follow his lead and I am unknown and unpersuasive. So, for that reason, we should prefer the first reading to the second. But the first reading is not only unrealistic but unattractive as well: it could be realized only in a totalitarian society. Some people are always much more influential than others in persuading their fellow citizens how to vote. In his day Martin Luther King had much greater influence over people’s opinions than almost any other private citizen, and today Oprah Winfrey, Tom Cruise, a variety of sports heroes, the CEO of Microsoft, the publisher of the New York Times, the editors of Fox News, and hundreds of other Americans have special power. We regret some people’s special influence because it is grounded in wealth, which we think should make no difference in politics. But we do not regret other people’s special influence—Reverend King’s, for instance—nor think this a defect in our democracy. On the contrary, we are proud of the power he had.

So if we want a mathematical reading of political equality, we must settle for the second reading after all. This ignores political influence and demands only equal impact: that each person have the same power to control the laws of his community just in virtue of the preferences he holds himself. This kind of equality can easily be achieved in a town meeting, simply by giving each person attending the meeting one vote. It requires considerably more strategy in a huge and complex political community with representative government, electoral districting, and a separation of official powers. Still, even in a continental nation with a government of relatively few people, each with huge power, citizens can each be provided one vote in all elections and electoral districts can be arranged so that each vote counts as much as any other. That goes a considerable distance toward equal impact for all.

Presidents, prime ministers, parliamentarians, and judges then still each have exponentially more immediate impact on law and policy than ordinary citizens do, and once elected they can set off on projects of their own with no concern for public opinion, particularly if they do not worry about reelection. These politicians might be idealists, adopting Edmund Burke’s declaration of independence from his electors,⑪ or crooks like Richard Nixon’s vice president, Spiro T. Agnew, lining their own pockets. But relatively frequent elections and vigilant and free media could make this less likely; in any case it is the best we can do in that direction. If we are drawn to the second reading of political equality, we will think that majoritarian democracy fits that ideal like a glove.

But the second reading remains unpersuasive. It seems irrational to care about equality of impact for its own sake, even when we recognize that equality of influence is unattainable and undesirable. An equal impact, on its own, is of no practical use to people one by one in a community of any size. Suppose you live in a community the size, say, of France. It elects its officials in frequent elections with full adult suffrage, enjoys a constitutional structure that gives every vote the same impact in those elections, provides the most unrestricted version of free speech, and enjoys vigorous, competitive, and politically diverse media. The measure of positive political control these facts provide for you is so small that it can sensibly be rounded off only to zero. Your decision to vote one way or another would not improve to any statistically significant degree the odds of your preference succeeding. People in a large community whose political impact is actually or close to equal have no more power over their own governance, just as individuals, than they would if priests took political decisions by reading entrails. If the political impact of an ordinary citizen with an equal vote is infinitesimal, why should it matter whether the infinitesimal impact each has is equally infinitesimal?

My argument may now appear to have gone too far. It seems to end in the idea that political equality is of no importance at all. Why not then settle for enlightened autocracy? Democracy is said to have the instrumental advantages I mentioned, but these might after all be achieved through a totalitarian government as well. Indeed, many political scientists think these advantages could be more easily achieved by totalitarian government in underdeveloped economies. A dictator might take the necessary soundings to learn what most people want and give it to them without the distraction and expense of elections; he might, for example, enact a fair system of taxation and redistribution modeled on the hypothetical insurance scheme I described in Chapter 16. Do we prefer democracy only because we worry that actual dictators would rule very differently? Is there no case for democracy other than what Judith Shklar called the liberalism of fear?⑫

There is, but we must turn to the third reading of our ideal to find it. Political equality is a matter not of political power but of political standing. Democracy confirms in the most dramatic way the equal concern and respect that the community together, as the custodian of coercive power, has for each of its members. Democracy is the only form of government, short of rule by lottery, that confirms that equal concern and respect in its most fundamental constitution. If any citizen is assigned less electoral impact than others, either because he is denied a vote or they are given extra votes, or because electoral arrangements place him in a district with more people but no more representatives, or for any other reason, then the difference signals a lesser political standing for him unless it can be justified in some way that negates that signal. If the law permitted only aristocrats, or priests, or men, or Christian or white citizens, or property-owning citizens, or citizens with diplomas, to vote, then that implication of lesser concern or respect would be undeniable. It would be no answer, to a woman’s demand for the vote, that one person’s vote on its own would be of no value at all to her. She might reply that giving all women the vote would be likely to produce legislation that would improve her situation: by changing the rules of marriage and contract, for instance. But she would demand the vote even if she did not favor such change. She would want the dignity, not just the power, of equal participation.

It is crucial now to notice, however, that some electoral arrangements that leave political impact unequal carry no signal of disrespect, no denial of dignity, at all. Given America’s unfortunate past racial injustice and the contemporary legacy of that injustice, taking special steps to increase the number of black representatives might well have important advantages for the whole community. It might help to break stereotypes that sustain racial tension and undermine black ambition.⑬ It would of course be unacceptable to disenfranchise some white citizens: the vote is so emblematic a badge of equal citizenship that stripping it from any group of citizens would be an irredeemable insult to them. But suppose the goal can be achieved by redistricting that makes the election of black representatives more likely. And that the most efficient form of redistricting to that end would leave the number of voters in different districts somewhat unequal, so that it took somewhat fewer in one district than in another to elect a single representative. It might be either dominantly white or dominantly black voters whose political impact was in that way infinitesimally lowered. Or dominantly neither. In any case, there could be no implication of second-class or diminished citizenship for anyone. It would be silly, in those circumstances, to insist on the greatest possible equality of impact just for its own sake.⑭

To recapitulate. Political equality requires that political power be distributed so as to confirm the political community’s equal concern and respect for all its members. Reserving power to any person or group through birth or the spoils of conquest or some aristocracy of talent, or denying the emblems of citizenship to any adult (except perhaps in consequence of a crime or other act against the community), is unacceptable. But arithmetic equality of influence is neither possible nor desirable, and arithmetic equality of impact is essential only so far as deviation means insult. The arithmetic equality of the majoritarian conception therefore has, in itself, no value at all. Majority rule is not an intrinsically fair decision procedure, and there is nothing about politics that makes it intrinsically fair there. It does not necessarily have more instrumental value than other political arrangements. If the legitimacy of a political arrangement can be improved by constitutional arrangements that create some inequality of impact but carry no taint or danger of indignity, then it would be perverse to rule these measures out. That is the fatal weakness of the majoritarian conception. It rightly emphasizes the value of equal impact, but it misunderstands the nature and hence the limits of that value; it compromises the true value at stake, which is positive liberty, by turning equality of impact into a dangerous fetish.

We choose the partnership conception of democracy. I repeat that this is not just a verbal stipulation about how we intend to use a popular honorific. By choosing the partnership and rejecting the majoritarian conception, we declare that there is no automatic or necessary compromise of any genuine political value when constitutional structures are adopted that are somewhat less likely to produce political decisions that match the majority’s preferences. However, that declaration leaves open the difficult questions we have only begun to raise. The partnership conception does not automatically demand equal political impact for each citizen’s vote. But it does demand this sometimes. When and why?

Representative Government (392)

I suggest a burden of argument. Legitimacy requires a distribution of political power that reflects the equal concern and respect that the community must have for each citizen. That requirement sets a default: any significant difference in the political impact of different citizen’s votes is undemocratic and wrong unless it meets two conditions, one negative and the other positive. First, it must not signal or presuppose that some people are born to rule others. There must be no aristocracy of birth, which includes an aristocracy of gender, caste, race, or ethnicity, and there must be no aristocracy of wealth or talent. Second, it must be plausible to suppose that the constitutional arrangement that creates the difference in impact improves the legitimacy of the community.

The first condition rules out the formal electoral discriminations that now belong, we hope, mainly to history, at least in the mature democracies. Adult suffrage is now in principle universal among citizens there for both genders and for all races and religions. In the United States and elsewhere, however, fossil evidence of discrimination persists. American states have in the past created barriers to registration and voting that were only thinly disguised attempts to disenfranchise some despised and feared race or the poor—these often came to the same thing. Some states still do: recently Illinois adopted a rule requiring voters to produce a driver’s license or other picture ID. It is disproportionately poor people who lack that identification, and though the Supreme Court allowed the regulation to stand, its decision was mistaken.⑮ We cannot take the first condition for granted anywhere.

That condition is automatically satisfied, however, by any constitutional arrangement that lowers the political impact of all citizens across the board; there can be no suspicion of indignity to any person or group when an important decision is left to an elected parliament rather than offered to the people at large in a referendum. If that decision counts as a partial disenfranchisement, it disenfranchises all unelected groups and persons equally. It is then the second condition that is in play, and we should now consider, in that light, the institution of representative government as a whole.

The majoritarian conception treats representative government as a necessary evil. It is obviously necessary: government by enormous town meeting, even on the Internet, is impossible. But representative government is potentially a serious threat to the goal of equal impact because it gives many officials each incalculably greater impact than any ordinary citizen has. The majoritarian conception hopes to reduce that possibility, as I said, by designing procedures of inducement and threat—a free press and the hurdle of frequent elections for incumbents—that make it likely that presidents and parliaments will decide as they think the majority wishes. If that strategy works, then equality of impact is effectively restored: officials become only conduits through which the majority works its will into legislation and policy. In fact, however, the strategy does not—and cannot—work very well, for both good and bad reasons. We do not discourage our officials from following their own conscience and belief in Burke’s spirit rather than mimicking what they think their constituents think. We embrace term limits, for example, in the knowledge that these will make lame-duck incumbents more independent. Alas, officials have other, less creditable, reasons for disregarding what the public wants: they need to please large contributors to their reelection campaigns, and what those contributors want is often very different from what the public needs.

The majoritarian conception’s defense of representative government is therefore quite weak. It is certainly not strong enough to resist the argument that major issues of principle should be submitted to large-scale referenda rather than to the ordinary political process. The nations of the European Union will continue to confront the question whether their citizens should be allowed to vote directly on new constitutional provisions for the Union, or whether the several parliaments are competent to effect those changes by treaty. The majoritarian conception must favor referenda. Such dramatic issues are not everyday occasions, and the efficiency of government will not be damaged by allowing the public as a whole to decide them.

The partnership conception offers a very different—and more successful—justification of representative government. Because it is citizens in general, not any particular group of them, whose political impact is diminished by assigning enormous power to elected officials, the institution is not an automatic deficit in democracy. On the plausible assumption that elected officials, rather than popular assemblies, are better able to protect individual rights from dangerous swings in public opinion, there can be no general democratic requirement that fundamental issues be put to referenda. So both conditions that our conception of political equality lays down for unequal political impact are met, at least in principle. It is then necessary to look to the details of electoral schedules, districts, and mechanics, and of the division of power among officials, to judge whether these are reasonably calculated to protect the democratic legitimacy they supposedly serve. There can be no algorithm for that test; hence the continuing debates about term limits, proportional representation, and the propriety of referenda. Reasonable people and politicians will disagree about which such structures improve the chance that the community will show equal respect and concern for all and each. But that is the test the partnership conception offers, not the cruder mathematics of majority rule.

Using that test reveals embarrassments. The constitutional system of every mature nation is a cragged riverbed of historical compromises, ideals, and prejudices: these may serve no purpose now, but equally they signal no disrespect for anyone. The United States provides ample illustration. The election of the president by an electoral college rather than by popular vote, and the composition of the Senate, in which sparse and populous states are each alike represented by two senators, ensure that some citizens have greater political impact than others. These inequalities are best explained as political compromises necessary long ago to create the nation. They also once had at least a colorable justification: they were thought helpful in protecting the interests of various minorities from the overweening power of richer parts of the new country. The inequalities cannot be justified in that way now—they are in fact deleterious to politics in various ways—but their preservation reflects entrenchment and inertia rather than any sense of entitlement or disrespect for anyone. Does the partnership conception nevertheless require that these inequalities be eliminated, so far as this is possible?

Elimination would not be possible without a new constitutional settlement in which either states would disappear or the small states that now enjoy an enormous advantage agree to give it up.⑯ Even the bare possibility nevertheless poses an important question of principle to which the partnership conception answers: yes, we need a new settlement. The issue is not academic. I emphasized that it makes little practical difference to each citizen whether his own impact is slightly larger or smaller than anyone else’s. That fact makes the arithmetical rigidity of the majoritarian conception a fetish. But institutional structures like the composition of the Senate or the mechanics of presidential elections do make a considerable practical difference overall.

Electing the president through a college rather than by direct vote distorts presidential elections: candidates concentrate their attention, and design their policies, to appeal to key “swing” states and largely neglect the others. The structure of the Senate works to the disadvantage of urban centers: legislation more favorable to their interests would be more likely if senators, like congressmen, were apportioned to states by population. If the electoral college or the present inequality of Senate representation served some purpose in promoting equal concern for all, as each was once thought to do, then the disadvantage would be merely an incidental side effect of a justified arrangement and would be acceptable for that reason. But because the inequality serves no such purpose, the disadvantage is arbitrary, and a failure to correct it, if any institution had the capacity to do so, would show an illegitimate insensitivity to the interests or opinions of those so disadvantaged.

Judicial Review (395)

We return, finally, to the great question—old and tired now in the United States but of increasing importance elsewhere—whether judicial review is undemocratic. Should unelected judges have the power to deny the majority what it genuinely wants and its duly elected representatives have enacted? We have in mind substantive judicial review: the power of judges not simply to ensure that citizens have the information they need to properly assess their own convictions, preferences, and policies, or to protect citizens from an incumbent government anxious unfairly to perpetuate its mandate, but actually to strike down legislation whose majoritarian pedigree is undeniable. The majoritarian conception declares: no. The partnership conception replies: not necessarily.

Substantive judicial review certainly creates a limited, but within its limits vast, disparity of political impact. In America it takes only five Supreme Court justices to undo what representatives of millions of ordinary citizens—or those ordinary citizens themselves in a referendum—have done. But the first condition the partnership conception sets out is nevertheless met. That difference in political impact holds between judges and everyone else: there is no discrimination of birth or wealth in place. The second condition is therefore crucial. Is it plausible that judicial review improves democratic legitimacy overall?

Constitutional judges are typically appointed rather than elected, and their terms extend beyond—in some cases very far beyond—the terms of presidents and parliaments who appointed them. The American people can fire a senator who voted to confirm a Supreme Court justice when the senator is next up for reelection, but they cannot fire the justice he voted to appoint. These facts figure prominently in the perennial argument whether judicial review is undemocratic: the fact that judges are not elected seems cardinal among the reasons for thinking that they pose a greater threat to democracy than presidents, prime ministers, governors, or parliamentarians do. This is, however, a crude simplification; in fact a red herring.

In modern times the appointment of a American Supreme Court justice is a heavily publicized event with very great political consequences for both the president who nominates and the senators who must vote on his nomination. The excitement created by a vacancy, or even an impending one, begins long before any actual nomination. The Senate hearings are televised, media comment is intense, and senators receive daily cascades of advice and threats from constituents and interest groups. The American public as a whole has vastly more influence over who becomes a justice than it has over which senator is elected from a small state and then becomes chairman of a crucial congressional committee or investigation or which unelected official becomes secretary of defense or chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank, each of whom has very great power for good or evil.

True, the public loses control over what a justice does once appointed. But it loses control over elected officials as well, and though it can refuse to reelect them, some of them have much greater power, until the day of new judgment arrives, than single justices have over their lifetimes. A president can cry havoc and let slip the dogs of war. He may be right or wrong to do so, but the power is in any case incomparable. George W. Bush was one of the most unpopular presidents in history, but he remained adamant in pursuit of the policies that made him unpopular. The majoritarian conception of democracy might suppose, as I said it did, that politicians will always be anxious to do what the majority wants. But history teaches otherwise.

Now compare the power that judges on constitutional courts have to defy the will of the people. Unlike presidents, prime ministers, and governors, constitutional judges have no power to act independently. They sit in panels of several members, and the decisions of a panel can usually be reviewed by the full court, which may consist of a great many judges. In the American Supreme Court all the justices sit on each decision (unless some must be excused for disability or reasons of conflict). So the power of any individual judge is limited by the need to attract a majority of other judges to his view.

A phalanx of like-minded justices can indeed strike down popular laws, impair popular policies, and critically alter our electoral institutions and processes. They can make very serious mistakes in exercising that power. The Supreme Court did great damage in ruling large parts of President Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal legislation unconstitutional in the 1930s and, in the early years of Chief Justice Roberts’s tenure, in striking down programs to relieve racial tension and discrimination.⑰ The Court damaged democracy itself both in the way it resolved the 2000 presidential election and in its recent 5–4 ruling that corporations cannot be prevented from spending what they wish on negative television advertising to defeat legislators who oppose their interests.⑱ Still, presidents, prime ministers, and senior legislators who head important committees can do more damage on their own than judges can do collectively. President Herbert Hoover had greater responsibility for economic tragedy than the Supreme Court that opposed Roosevelt’s remedies did, and even the Supreme Court’s worst decisions of recent years do not match in consequence those a president made. Alan Greenspan, the longtime chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank, is thought by several critics to be in some significant part responsible, through his failures of oversight, for the great 2008 crisis in world credit markets. If so, he ruined more lives over a few years than any single justice has done, on his own, even during decades of tenure. An independence index that noticed that constitutional judges are not elected, but also took into account all the other relevant factors and dimensions of power and accountability, could not confidently rank judicial review as overall more damaging to political equality, on any measure, than several other features of complex representative government.

That is not, however, the main question now. This is rather the second of our two conditions. Does the institution of judicial review contribute overall to the legitimacy of a government? Representative government is indeed necessary: some temporary concentration of power in a few hands is indispensable if a large political community is to survive and prosper. That is not true of judicial review; large nations have survived and prospered without it, and some still do. Any defense of judicial review as democratic must take some other form: it must argue that judicial review improves overall legitimacy by making it more likely that the community will settle on and enforce some appropriate conception of negative liberty and of a fair distribution of resources and opportunities, as well as of the positive liberty that is the subject of this chapter.

Whether that argument can succeed for any political community obviously depends on a host of factors that vary from place to place. These include the strength of the rule of law, the independence of the judiciary, and the character of the constitution judges are asked to enforce. Judicial review may well be less necessary in nations where stable majorities have a strong record of protecting the legitimacy of their government by correctly identifying and respecting the rights of individuals and minorities. Unfortunately history discloses few such nations, even among the mature democracies. The recent reactions of both the United States and the United Kingdom to terrorist threats illustrates a failure of nerve and honor in both these somewhat different political cultures, for instance.

Nothing guarantees in advance that judicial review either will or will not make a majoritarian community more legitimate and democratic. Other strategies for supervising and correcting majoritarian politics can be imagined that might prove superior. Perhaps, for example, the upper house of the British Parliament will be reformed by electing members (without comic titles or dress) for a single longish term and making former members of the House of Commons ineligible. Such a body would enjoy much more popular support than the present institution but would remain sufficiently insulated from party politics so that it might be entrusted with barring legislation that it deemed contrary to Britain’s Human Rights Act. Much less radical changes could be imagined that might improve the performance of existing constitutional bodies and courts: I have elsewhere recommended, for example, that justices of the American Supreme Court be subject to long term limits.⑲

History is not decisive of the large question whether judicial review can be expected to improve legitimacy in the future. But history counts. I am denying what many lawyers and political scientists claim: that judicial review is inevitably and automatically a defect in democracy. But it does not follow that any democracy has actually benefited from the institution. Whether the American Supreme Court has in fact improved democracy in the United States depends on a judgment you and I might make differently. For years I was accused of defending judicial review because I approved of the decisions the Supreme Court actually made. I am no longer open to that charge. If I had to judge the American Supreme Court only on its record during the last few years, I would judge it a failure.⑳ But I believe that the overall balance of its historical impact remains positive. Everything now turns on the character of future Supreme Court nominations. We must keep our fingers crossed.

===============================================================================

➀ John Locke, Two Treatises of Government, ed. Peter Laslett (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1960). Janos Kis called my attention to the value of Locke’s statement.

➁ Ronald Dworkin, Sovereign Virtue: The Theory and Practice of Equality (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000), chapter 10; Dworkin, Freedom’s Law (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1996), introduction, 1; Dworkin, Is Democracy Possible Here? Principles for a New Political Debate (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2006).

➂ Stephen Macedo suggests that the term “majoritarian” is so hard accurately to define, and so confusing in its uses, that it should be dropped from discussions of democracy (Macedo, “Against Majoritarianism: Democratic Values and Institutional Design,” in Symposium: Justice for Hedgehogs: A Conference on Ronald Dworkin’s Forthcoming Book [special issue], Boston University Law Review 90, no. 2 [April 2010] [hereafter BU]: 1029). I have not followed that suggestion here because I have used the term before and fear that it would be misleading or at least clumsy to avoid it. But I agree with the spirit of his suggestion.

➃ This is much weaker than what John Rawls requires of a “well-ordered” society (Rawls, A Theory of Justice [Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1971], 453–62) because it does not include any requirement, very unlikely to be met, that citizens share the same conception of justice.

➄ John Ely, Democracy and Distrust: A Theory of Judicial Review (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1980), chapter 5, “Clearing the Channels of Political Change,” 105–34; Janos Kis, “Constitutional Precommitment Revisited,” NYU Colloquium Paper, September 3, 2009, www.law.nyu.edu/ecm _dlv2/groups/public/@nyu_law_website_ _academics_ _colloquia_ _legal _political _and _social _philosophy/documents/documents/ecm_pro_062725.pdf.

➅ See Jeremy Waldron, “The Core of the Case against Judicial Review,” Yale Law Journal 115 (2006): 1346.

➆ Ibid., 1387.

➇ Ibid., 1387n112.

➈ Waldron is unsure what claim I mean to make through the lifeboat example (Waldron, “A Majority in the Lifeboat,” BU: 1043). I intend only a very limited and highly circumscribed point—only that the majoritarian principle is not, as his statement I quoted claims it to be, a general principle of fairness independent of context—that is, an “intrinsically” fair process. His own fresh discussion in this essay suggests that he agrees. He says that a majority of passengers should be invited to choose from a menu of procedures to select which of them should be thrown overboard, but now adds that majority decision should not be on the menu. But if there are reasons why majority rule should not be on that menu, then these are equally reasons why a majority should not be authorized to pick from the menu unless it includes no option that would antecedently and in a known way favor some passengers over others. Waldron’s own suggestion, choosing death for the oldest or least healthy passengers, would be ruled out by that test. We do want a procedure that does not bias the process from the start. But head-counting would be very unlikely to satisfy that condition. This is most certainly not an argument that majority rule is never a fair method of decision. On the contrary I insist that it is appropriate in politics when conditions of legitimacy are met. Waldron believes he has other arguments against judicial review, beyond the intrinsic fairness of the majority decision principle. I agree that the lifeboat case has no power whatever to impeach any such argument he offers; I certainly do not regard that example, as he fears I do, as a “knockdown” argument against a majoritarian conception of democracy. He refers to the extended case I have made over several years for a different conception, a case summarized and elaborated in this chapter. He declares that the lifeboat example adds nothing whatever to that case. He is absolutely right. That example is directed only at what I take to be a mistaken philosophical assumption that should not figure in the argument. The example is not intended to replace or even bolster the positive case I make here.

A further issue. Waldron says in this essay that he has never received an honorable answer to a question he has been asking for twenty years. Why, if it is not intrinsically fair, is majority rule appropriate on final appellate courts like the Supreme Court, which decides many very important cases by a 5–4 vote? The choice among checks on majoritarian procedures must of course depend on which options are available. Judicial review is an available option for checking legislative and executive decisions. It is also an available option for checking judicial review itself through a hierarchal system of appellate courts, and most systems of judicial review use further judicial review as a check in that way. But of course judicial review is not available to check the decision of the highest appellate court; if it were, the court would not be the highest. It does not follow that if the judges in this series of reviews disagree, the disagreement should be settled by a vote among them. A Supreme Court’s 5–4 decision might overrule the unanimous decisions of a great many more judges on lower courts. But the head-counting procedure does hold on the Supreme Court itself, and it makes perfect sense to ask what other alternatives, beyond judicial review, are available. We can easily imagine some. Constitutional courts might give more votes to senior judges on the ground that they have more experience. Or more votes to junior judges because they are likely to better represent popular opinion. The Supreme Court does give each justice an equal vote, but it also gives some justices much more power than others in shaping constitutional law. When the Chief Justice is in the majority, he decides the often crucial question who will write the opinion for the Court; when he is in the minority the senior justice in the majority does. No vote decides that issue. The Court’s practice of adopting majority rule for the verdict itself can sensibly be challenged. But because judicial review is logically not an option at that stage, the choice of a majority decision procedure hardly suggests that that procedure is intrinsically fairer than a different process that includes judicial review.

➉ In general, political procedures aimed at a collective good should take care to separate so far as possible what I have called the “personal” from the “external” preferences of the population, and count only the former. See Ronald Dworkin, Taking Rights Seriously (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1977), chapter 9. A straightforward majority vote in politics cannot achieve that separation. I am grateful to Waldron for pointing out the relevance of my old distinction. See Waldron, “A Majority in the Lifeboat,” 1043.

⑪ Edmund Burke, “Speech to the Electors of Bristol,” in The Works of the Right Honourable Edmund Burke, vol. 1 (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1855), 178–80.

⑫ Judith N. Shklar, “The Liberalism of Fear,” in Nancy L. Rosenblum, ed., Liberalism and the Moral Life (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1989), 21–38.

⑬ Dworkin, Sovereign Virtue, chapters 11 and 12.

⑭ In Hunt v. Cromartie, 532 U.S. 234 (2001), the Supreme Court upheld a redistricting creating a dominantly black district because it could not be proved that the gerrymandering was intended to benefit a race rather than a political party. The latter goal, it assumed, was constitutionally permissible but the former not.

⑮ Crawford v. Marion County Election Board, 553 U.S. 181 (2008).

⑯ It has been proposed that states agree, one by one, to cast their electoral votes in presidential elections for the popular-vote winner. If enough states agreed so that their combined electoral votes would elect a president, no further loser in the popular vote could be elected. However, states could drop out of the system at any time. The more serious problem of the distortion of representation in the Senate could not be solved even by constitutional amendment. At least the Constitution so provides in Article V.

⑰ Parents Involved in Community Schools v. Seattle School District No. 1, 551 U.S. 701 (2007). For criticism, see Ronald Dworkin, The Supreme Court Phalanx: The Court’s New Right-Wing Bloc (New York: New York Review of Books, 2008).

⑱ George W. Bush v. Al Gore, 531 U.S. 98 (2000); Citizens United v. Federal Elections Commission, decided January 21, 2010. See my articles in the New York Review of Books: “A Badly Flawed Election,” January 11, 2001, and “The Decision That Threatens Democracy,” May 13, 2010.

⑲ Dworkin, Is Democracy Possible Here? 158–59.

⑳ Dworkin, “The Supreme Court Phalanx.”

===============================================================================

Key concepts:

democracy, two models (383)
- majoritarian
  - defines democracy only procedurally
  - equal impact
- partnership (384)
  - ties democracy to the substantive constraints of legitimacy
  - equal standing
  
people (380)

political equality (388)
- equal influence
- equal impact
- no adult citizen’s political impact is less than that of any other citizen for reasons that compromise his dignity
Political equality is a matter not of political power but of political standing (390)