19 Law (400)

Law and Morals

The Classical View

I have written more about law than other parts of political morality. My aim in this chapter is not to summarize my jurisprudential views in any detail but rather to show how they take their place within the integrated scheme of value this book attempts.➀ I can therefore be—at least relatively—brief. I concentrate on what is no doubt the hottest of the chestnuts burning lawyers’ fingers for centuries: What is the relation between law and morals? I begin by describing how that problem has traditionally been conceived by almost all legal philosophers, including once myself, and then argue for a sharp revision in how we understand the issues in play.

Here is the orthodox picture. “Law” and “morals” describe different collections of norms. The differences are deep and important. Law belongs to a particular community. Morality does not: it consists of a set of standards or norms that have imperative force for everyone. Law is, at least for the most part, made by human beings through contingent decisions and practices of different sorts. It is a contingent fact that the law in Rhode Island requires people to compensate others whom they injure negligently. Morality is not made by anyone (except, on some views, a god), and it is not contingent on any human decision or practice. It is a necessary, not contingent, fact that people who injure others negligently have a moral obligation to compensate them if they can.

I am describing morality as most people understand it: what I called in Chapter 2 the “ordinary” view. Some philosophers reject this description: they are conventionalists or relativists or skeptics of some other form. They think that morality is more like law in all the ways I distinguished: that it belongs to communities, that it is made by people, that it is contingent. I suggested in Part One why I believe this view indefensible: for now I only mean to describe morality as you and I understand it. But the orthodox picture explains just as well how relativists and conventionalists see the relation between law and morals. They agree that these are different systems of norms and that problems arise about the connections between them, even though they think that both law and morality are man-made.

The classical jurisprudential question asks: How are these two different collections of norms related or connected? One kind of connection is obvious. When a community decides what legal norms to create, it should be guided and restrained by morality. It should not, except in very exceptional emergency circumstances, make laws it believes unjust. The classical question asks about a different kind of connection. How does the content of each system affect the content of the other as things actually stand? Questions arise in both directions. How far do our moral obligations and responsibilities depend on what the law in fact provides? Do we have a moral obligation to obey the law whatever it is? How far do our legal rights and obligations depend, as things stand, on what morality requires? Can an immoral rule really be part of the law?

We reviewed the first set of these questions in Chapter 14. We concentrate now on the second set. How far is morality relevant in fixing what the law requires on any particular issue? Lawyers have defended a great variety of theories. But I will consider only two of these: what is called “legal positivism” and what we may call “interpretivism.” These labels are not important, because nothing in the argument I’ll make—that the traditional way of understanding these theories is misleading—depends on my labels’ historical accuracy.

Here is a very general account of the two theories. Positivism declares the complete independence of the two systems. What the law is depends only on historical matters of fact: it depends finally on what the community in question, as a matter of custom and practice, accepts as law.➁ If an unjust law meets the community’s accepted test for law—if it was adopted by a legislature and the judges all agree that the legislature is the supreme lawmaker—then the unjust law really is law. Interpretivism, on the other hand, denies that law and morals are wholly independent systems. It argues that law includes not only the specific rules enacted in accordance with the community’s accepted practices but also the principles that provide the best moral justification for those enacted rules. The law then also includes the rules that follow from those justifying principles, even though those further rules were never enacted. Interpretivism, in other words, treats legal reasoning as I have argued in this book we must treat all interpretive reasoning. It treats the concept of law as an interpretive concept.

Actually there are several concepts of law, and it is necessary now briefly to distinguish among these.➂ We use “law” in a sociological sense, as when we say that law began in primitive societies; an aspirational sense, as when we celebrate the rule of law; and a doctrinal sense we use to report what the law is on some subject, as when we say that under the law of Connecticut fraud is a tort. Positivism and interpretivism are both theories about the correct use of the doctrinal concept. Positivism has traditionally treated that concept as criterial: it has aimed to identify the tests of pedigree that lawyers or at least legal officials share for identifying true propositions of doctrinal law. Interpretivism treats the doctrinal concept as interpretive: it treats lawyers’ claims about what the law holds or requires on some matter as conclusions of an interpretive argument, even though most of the interpretive work is almost always hidden.

Forgive a paragraph of autobiography. When more than forty years ago I first tried to defend interpretivism, I defended it within this orthodox two-systems picture.➃ I assumed that law and morals are different systems of norms and that the crucial question is how they interact. So I said what I have just said: that the law includes not just enacted rules, or rules with pedigree, but justifying principles as well. I soon came to think, however, that the two-systems picture of the problem was itself flawed, and I began to approach the issue through a very different picture.➄ I did not fully appreciate the nature of that picture, however, or how different it is from the orthodox model, until later when I began to consider the larger issues of this book.

The Fatal Flaw

There is a flaw in the two-systems picture. Once we take law and morality to compose separate systems of norms, there is no neutral standpoint from which the connections between these supposedly separate systems can be adjudicated. Where shall we turn for an answer to the question whether positivism or interpretivism is a more accurate or otherwise better account of how the two systems relate? Is this a moral question or a legal question? Either choice yields a circular argument with much too short a radius.

Suppose we treat the question as legal. We look to legal material—constitutions, statutes, judicial decisions, customary practices, and the rest—and we ask: What does the correct reading of all that material declare the relation between law and morality to be? We cannot answer that question without a theory in hand about how to read legal material, and we can’t have such a theory until we have already decided what role morality plays in fixing the content of the law. When we ask whether the legal material demonstrates or denies a connection between law and morality, do we suppose that the material includes not only rules with a pedigree in conventional practice but also the principles necessary to justify those rules? If not, then we have built positivism in from the start and must not feign surprise when positivism emerges at the end. But if we do include justifying principles, then we have built in interpretivism.

If we turn to morality for our answer, on the other hand, we beg the question in the opposite direction. We can say: Would it be good for justice if morality played the part in legal analysis that interpretivism claims it does? Or is it actually better for the moral tone of a community if law and morals are kept separate as the positivists insist? These questions certainly make sense; they are indeed key jurisprudential questions. But according to the two-systems picture they can produce only circular arguments. If law and morals are two separate systems, it begs the question to suppose that the best theory of what law is depends on such moral issues. That assumes we have already decided against positivism.

Analytic Jurisprudence?

The two-systems picture therefore faces an apparently insoluble problem: it poses a question that cannot be answered other than by assuming an answer from the start. That logical difficulty explains what would otherwise be a remarkable fact: the turn in Anglo-American jurisprudence, by positivists beginning in the nineteenth century, to the surprising idea that the puzzle about law and morals is neither a legal nor a moral problem but instead a conceptual one: that it can be settled through an analysis of the very concept of law. (To be more precise: that it can be settled through an analysis of what I called the “doctrinal” concept of law.)➅ We can excavate the nature or essence of that concept without making any prior legal or moral assumptions, the positivists claimed, and then we see plainly that the actual content of law is one thing and what the law should be quite another, so that law and morals are conceptually distinct. Something even more curious happened. Other lawyers, who rejected positivism, nevertheless accepted this account of their problem’s character. They tried to show that philosophical analysis of the doctrinal concept of law reveals, contrary to positivism, that morality does have a role in legal reasoning.

We have already noticed, in Chapter 8, the fallacy in these shared assumptions. We cannot solve the circularity problem of the two-systems picture through an analysis of the concept of law unless that concept can sensibly be treated as a criterial (or perhaps as a natural-kind) concept. But it cannot be. There is no agreement among lawyers and judges in complex and mature political communities about how to decide which propositions of law are true. No wonder positivists have had such difficulty in explaining the kind or mode of conceptual analysis they have in mind. John Austin, a nineteenth-century positivist, said that this was just a matter of the correct use of language, which is plainly wrong. H. L. A. Hart, though he called his most influential book The Concept of Law, never offered much by way of explanation of what he took conceptual analysis to be.➆ When he wrote that book, in Oxford, the dominant account of analysis among Oxford philosophers supposed that analysis consists in making evident the hidden convergent speech practices of ordinary users of the language. But there are no convergent practices to expose. The doctrinal concept of law can only be understood as an interpretive concept with the character and structure we reviewed in Chapter 8. So defending an analysis of that interpretive concept can only mean defending a controversial theory of political morality. An analysis of the concept must assume from the start an intimate connection between law and morality. The supposed escape from the circularity problem is no escape at all.

There is guidance as well as correction in this explanation. Because the doctrinal concept of law is an interpretive concept, we must begin any analysis of that concept by identifying the political, commercial, and social practices in which the concept figures. These practices assume that people have, among other political rights, rights with a special feature: these are legal rights because they are enforceable on demand in an adjudicative political institution such as a court. We construct a conception of law—an account of the grounds needed to support a claim of right enforceable on demand in that way—by finding a justification of those practices in a larger integrated network of political value. We construct a theory of law, that is, in the same way that we construct a theory of other political values—of equality, liberty, and democracy. Any theory of law, understood in that interpretive way, will inevitably be controversial, just as those latter theories are.

Law as Morality (405)

A Tree Structure

We have now scrapped the old picture that counts law and morality as two separate systems and then seeks or denies, fruitlessly, interconnections between them. We have replaced this with a one-system picture: we now treat law as a part of political morality. That will sound absurd to some readers and paradoxical to others. It seems to suggest, idiotically, that a community’s law is always exactly what it should be. Many readers will think that I have finally pressed my ambition to unify value too far: I have indeed become Procrustes sacrificing sense to a philosophical theory. In fact I have in mind something much less revolutionary and much less counterintuitive.

The latter parts of this book have seen a tree structure growing. We saw how personal morality might be thought to flow from ethics and then how political morality might be seen to flow from personal morality. Our aim has been to integrate what are often taken to be separate departments of evaluation. We can easily place the doctrinal concept of law in that tree structure: law is a branch, a subdivision, of political morality. The more difficult question is how that concept should be distinguished from the rest of political morality—how these two interpretive concepts should be distinguished to show one as a distinct part of the other. Any plausible answer will center on the phenomenon of institutionalization.

Political rights can be distinguished from personal moral rights only in a community that has developed some version of what Hart called secondary rules: rules establishing legislative, executive, and adjudicative authority and jurisdiction.➇ Legal rights can sensibly be distinguished from other political rights only if that community has at least an embryonic version of the separation of powers Montesquieu described.➈ It is then necessary to distinguish two classes of political rights and duties. Legislative rights are rights that the community’s lawmaking powers be exercised in a certain way: to create and administer a system of public education, for instance, and not to censor political speech. Legal rights are those that people are entitled to enforce on demand, without further legislative intervention, in adjudicative institutions that direct the executive power of sheriff or police. The law of contract gives me a right, on demand, to force you to repay my loan. The political obligation we discussed in Chapter 14—to obey whatever laws lawmaking institutions adopt—is a legal obligation because it can be enforced on official demand in and through such institutions. Of course, both kinds of rights may be controversial: it may be controversial that I do have a right that a particular educational scheme be adopted or that I do have a right enforceable on demand that you repay what I claim to be a loan. The difference is not one of certainty but of opportunity. Legislative rights must wait their turn: in a democracy the vagaries of politics will determine which legislative rights will be redeemed and when. Legal rights are subject to different vagaries, but in principle they entitle individual members of the community to secure what they ask through processes directly available. Legislative rights, even when acknowledged, are of no immediate force; legal rights, once acknowledged, are immediately enforceable, on demand, through adjudicative rather than legislative institutions.

The distinction has no necessary sociological consequence. Claims about legislative rights play an important role in politics even when there is little chance that they will be recognized in parliamentary action; legal rights play their most important role in social and commercial life when there is no prospect of or even interest in adjudicative enforcement. But the distinction is nevertheless philosophically illuminating: it teaches how we should understand political theories and theories of law. General political philosophy treats, among many other issues, legislative rights. A theory of law treats legal rights, but it is nevertheless a political theory because it seeks a normative answer to a normative political question: Under what conditions do people acquire genuine rights and duties that are enforceable on demand in the way described?

That question may be put at different levels of abstraction: it may be asked about a particular political community, like Belgium or the European Union, or, most abstractly, about everywhere or nowhere. I emphasize that it is a question of political morality but—as this distinction among levels of abstraction assumes—ordinary political facts are very likely to figure in the answer. It must be part of any responsible answer, at any level of abstraction, that historical facts about legislation and, perhaps, social convention do play a role. How great or exclusive a role these play is a matter of contest. Legal positivism argues that such historical acts or conduct is exclusively decisive in deciding what legal rights people have. Interpretivism offers a different answer, in which principles of political morality also have a part to play. Once we see these positions as rival normative political theories, not as rival claims about unpacking criterial concepts, we are able to correct a historical mistake. Too much jurisprudence has traveled from some declaration about the essence or very concept of law to theories about rights and duties of people and officials. Our journey must be in the opposite direction: vocabulary should follow political argument, not the other way around. As we shall soon see, ancient jurisprudential puzzles, such as the puzzles of evil law, take very different shape when we take that order of argument to heart.

We have now placed legal rights in our evolving tree structure and so filled out the one-system picture of law and politics. Legal rights are political rights, but a special branch because they are properly enforceable on demand through adjudicative and coercive institutions without need for further legislation or other lawmaking activity. There is nothing mysterious or metaphysical in this way of accommodating law in our structure: it supposes no emergent forces. Nor—this is crucial—does it deny the distinctness of questions about what the law is and what it ought to be.

Is and Ought: Family Morality

I emphasize that last claim—that the integrated, one-system picture does not deny the obviously essential distinction between what law is and what it should be. Here is a banal domestic story: the development of a special moral code or practice for a single family. You have two children: a teenage girl, G, and her younger brother, B. G has promised to take B to a sold-out and much-heralded pop concert for which she has been lucky enough to acquire two tickets. But someone she has been anxious to date calls, and she offers the place to him instead. B protests and comes to you; he wants you to make G keep her word. An army of questions arises. Do you have legitimate associational authority, as a parent, to tell G what to do or to tell B what to accept? Do they have distinct associational obligations to do or to accept what you say, just as your children? If you think that you do have that authority, and that they do have that obligation, then are coercive measures appropriate—threats that will induce G to keep her promise even though she does not wish to do so or does not think that she should? Are there conditions on your use of coercive authority beyond your conviction that she should keep her promise?

If so, what are those further conditions? How far are they supplied or shaped by your family’s history? Does it matter—and if so, in what way—how you have exercised your authority on similar occasions in the past? Or, if you have a partner, how that partner exercised a similar authority? What makes a past occasion similar? What if you have revised your opinion about the importance of promising? You used to think promises should almost never be broken; now you are attracted to a more flexible view. How far should you regard yourself as required by your past decisions to treat new claims in the old way? Do you have to announce your changed views in advance of the events that give rise to new arguments? Or can you immediately decide new controversies as you now think right? Need you try to anticipate, as you reflect on these issues, the other controversies that will inevitably arise? How far must you adjust or simplify your arguments now so that your rulings provide adequate guidance to allow the family to anticipate what you will decide in the future?

The family story nicely illustrates how a distinction between what law is and what it ought to be can arise as a complexity within morality itself. As you decide the domestic questions, you construct a distinct institutional morality: a special morality governing the use of coercive authority within your family. This is a dynamic morality; as pronouncements are made and enforced on concrete occasions, that special family morality shifts. At some point a difference clearly emerges between two questions. What conditions hold, now, on the use of coercive authority within the family, given its distinct history? What conditions would a better family history, reflecting better answers to questions like those I listed, have produced? It is crucial to see that these two different questions are both moral questions and that they must undoubtedly attract different answers. It would be wrong to think that the special family history has created a distinct nonmoral code, like traditions of dress, that have some form of authority within the family that is not a moral authority.

That would be a mistake because the reasons that you and other members of the family have for deferring to this history are themselves moral reasons. They draw on principles of fairness that condition coercion—principles about fair play, fair notice, and a fair distribution of authority, for instance, that make your family’s distinct history morally pertinent. We may call these structuring principles because they create your distinct family morality. If you made a decision now that did not respect those structuring principles—for example, by imposing a standard on G that you refused to enforce in her favor on some earlier occasion—your decision would be not simply surprising, like wearing a tie to a picnic, but unfair. Unfair, that is, unless some new and better interpretation of those principles shows why it is not unfair. And, of course, any new interpretation of these principles, like any interpretation of social history, is itself a moral exercise: it calls on moral conviction. These facts certainly do not erase the distinction between what the family morality is and what it should have been. The best interpretation of the structuring principles may well require that some decision now regretted nevertheless be followed as a precedent. Fresh interpretation of these principles might well mitigate the difference between family and more general morality. But it cannot erase the difference. You may well feel obliged to command what you wish you did not have to command.➉

What difference Does It Make? (409)

Theory

If lawyers and laymen take up the integrated, one-system theory of law in place of the dead-end two-systems model, legal philosophy and practice will shift. The substance of the old confrontation between positivism and interpretivism would remain, but, as I said, in a political rather than conceptual form. A political global positivist would need arguments why justice should never count in deciding how the constitutional or substantive law of a political community should be interpreted, and it is hard to imagine where he might find such arguments. But a narrower, more selective kind of positivism defended on political grounds might well seem persuasive to some. A positivist might argue, for example, that ambiguous or vague statutes should be read in whatever way the legislature that adopted them would most likely have decided if confronted with the choice. He might say that making interpretation turn on a historical test in that way would improve predictability; that though that test might not eliminate uncertainty and controversy, it would substantially reduce them.⑪ Or he might say that allowing even long-dead elected legislators to decide political issues, even counterfactually, is more democratic than entrusting those issues to the moral sensibilities of unelected contemporary judges. In any case, jurisprudence would become both more challenging and more important. Treating legal theory as a branch of political philosophy, to be pursued in philosophy and politics departments as well as law schools, would deepen both disciplines.

Evil Law

Certain other changes in substantive legal theory might follow as well. If we treat law as a branch of political morality, we need to distinguish between legal and other political rights. I have suggested one way: that we classify legal rights as those that are enforceable on demand in the way I described. Much academic writing rejects that suggestion, however. Legal philosophers argue, for instance, about an ancient jurisprudential puzzle of almost no practical importance that has nevertheless had a prominent place in seminars on legal theory: the puzzle of evil law. The Fugitive Slave Act, passed by the American Congress before the Civil War, declared that slaves who escaped to free states remained slaves and required officials of those states to return them into slavery. Judges asked to enforce the Act faced, as some of them described it, a moral dilemma. They believed that though the Act was wicked, it was nevertheless valid law.⑫ They therefore thought they had to choose among three unpleasant alternatives: enforcing what they knew to be grave injustice; resigning, which would only mean that other officials would enforce that injustice; or lying about what they thought the law was.

This description of their dilemma seems to presuppose the two-systems account of law and morality. It seems to require a firm distinction between the questions of what the law is and whether judges should enforce that law. But the integrated account all but erases the difference between these two questions. It distinguishes law from the rest of political morality, in effect, by defining a legal right as a right to a judicial decision. It seems to force us to say either that the Fugitive Slave Act was not valid law after all, which seems contrary to near-universal opinion, or that judges did have a duty to enforce that wicked law.

We should remember, as we begin our response to this objection, the decisive objections to the two-systems picture we noticed earlier. It is not an option; we must find some way of explaining the evil law puzzle within the integrated conception. Set the question of nomenclature—should we call the Fugitive Slave Act law—aside for a moment. Concentrate first on the underlying moral issue. Did judges have a political obligation, given their role and circumstances, to rule in favor of slaveholders claiming their escaped “property”? This is a more complex question than might first appear. The United States Congress (let us assume) was sufficiently legitimate so that its enactments generally created political obligations. The structuring fairness principles that make law a distinct part of political morality—principles about political authority, precedent, and reliance—gave the slaveholders’ claims more moral force than they would otherwise have had. But their moral claims were nevertheless and undoubtedly undermined by a stronger moral argument of human rights. So the law should not have been enforced. That is the right answer, let us assume, to the basic moral question.

Now return to nomenclature. We seem to have a choice. We might say that the slaveholders had, in principle, a political right to regain their slaves on demand but that this right was trumped, in the language I used in Chapter 14, by an emergency—in this case a moral emergency. We express that thought best by saying what most lawyers would say: that the Act was valid law but too unjust to enforce. Or we might say that the slaveholders did not have a right to what they asked even in principle. We express that conclusion by saying what some other lawyers would say: that the Act was too unjust to count as valid law.

The first account, and therefore the first way of putting the point, seems preferable in these circumstances. It expresses nuances that the second smothers. It explains why the judges confronted with the Act faced, as they said, a moral dilemma and not simply a prudential one. The second option would seem more accurate, however, in another, very different, case that is also often cited in academic seminars. The hideous Nazi edicts did not create even prima facie or arguable rights and duties. The purported Nazi government was fully illegitimate, and no other structuring principles of fairness argued for enforcement of those edicts. It is morally more accurate to deny that these edicts were law. The German judges asked to enforced them faced only prudential dilemmas, not moral ones.

The integrated account of law allows this discrimination. The dead-end two-systems picture does not. However, the important question posed by these familiar academic examples is the moral one we first considered. It would be misleading, in my opinion, to say flatly either that the Fugitive Slave Act was not valid law, or that the Nazi edicts were valid law. Misleading in both cases because these descriptions obscure morally important aspects of each case and differences between them. But the infelicity of expression would not amount to conceptual error. The ancient jurisprudential problem of evil law is sadly close to a verbal dispute.

Partial Enforcement

Other judges and writers depend on the two-systems picture in other ways. Some argue, for instance, that the United States Constitution creates legal rights that are not properly enforced by courts: this seems, once again, to assume a distinction between theories of law and theories of adjudication. When the United States D.C. Circuit Court overruled a lower court decision that ordered the government to admit Uighur detainees wrongly held in Guantánamo Bay, it explained, “Not every violation of a right yields a remedy, even when the right is constitutional.”⑬

Lawrence Sager, a prominent defender of that thesis, offers examples like this one.⑭ A constitution declares that people have a right to state-financed health care. A constitutional court believes that it is not well placed to adjudicate all the delicate questions of budget allocation and medical science that it would face if it tried to decide exactly which health plan citizens were entitled to have. So it declines to enforce that constitutional right directly. It concedes that a government that put in place no plan at all would be in violation of its citizens’ legal rights. But it refuses to require any such plan. However, if government does establish a health care system, the court would rule on citizens’ claims that the rules of that system discriminate illegitimately or refuse care arbitrarily. In these circumstances, Sager and others wish to say that citizens do have a legal right to health care, granted by the constitution, but that courts enforce only part of what they are legally entitled to have. Citizens must look to legislation for the most important part: to have some health care rather than none.

This is indeed an available way to describe the situation: no one would misunderstand. The different vocabulary I suggest seems at least equally natural, however. We might say that not all the rights a constitution declares are legal rights. Some, like those touching foreign policy, or those much more efficiently enforced by other branches of government, are best treated as political but not legal—that is, as rights not enforceable by private citizens on demand. Others, like a right to the equal protection of any health care scheme that a government does adopt, are indeed legal rights. Which of these rather different ways of describing the situation is theoretically sounder?

The first description—that some legal rights are not enforceable on demand—might be tempting if we could sensilbly adopt the two-systems view and a positivist theory of how we should decide what the law is. We might then say that though certain constitutional rights meet the tests for valid law and are hence legal rights, there are independent reasons why courts should not try to enforce them. But once we reject the two-systems view as self-defeating, there seems no sound theoretical basis for that position. It would make little sense to say what we said about the Fugitive Slave Act: that citizens have a prima facie constitutional right to medical care on demand that is however trumped by some emergency that prevents judges from actually enforcing it. In the Slave Act case, the structuring principles of fairness that distinguish legal from other political rights do argue for enforcement: they support the claims of the slaveholders. In the medical case, it is these very principles, which include principles about the best allocation of political power in a coercive state, that supply the argument against enforcement.

The Morality of Procedure

The two-systems picture created an important distinction between process and substance: between the procedures through which law is created and the content of the law that is created. The long debate about law and morals concentrated on substance. Is an immoral law really law? Does justice help decide whether people swindled by Bernie Madoff can sue the Securities and Exchange Commission for negligence? The debate left process largely alone: it seemed plain to most academic lawyers that the methods through which law is created are a matter of local convention whose properties are fixed entirely by that convention.⑮ Indeed, that assumption seems essential to the two-systems picture. It would be hard to defend positivism, even on that picture, if judges disagreed about important issues of constitutional procedure. But once we reject the two-systems model, and count law a distinct part of political morality, we must treat the special structuring principles that separate law from the rest of political morality as themselves political principles that need a moral reading.

When I was a law student in Britain, more than half a century ago, I was told that in that country, unlike America, the legislature—Parliament—is supreme. That was held to be a cardinal example of what was just true as a matter of unchallengeable law: it went without saying. But it hardly went without saying in an earlier century: Lord Coke disagreed in the seventeenth century, for instance.⑯ Nor does it go without saying now. Many lawyers, and at least some judges, now believe that Parliament’s power is indeed limited. When the government recently floated the idea of a bill that would oust the courts of jurisdiction over detainees suspected of terrorism, these lawyers claimed that such an act would be null and void.⑰ What changed, and then changed again?

The answer seems clear enough. Once, in Coke’s time, the idea that individuals have rights as trumps over the collective good—natural rights—was very widely accepted. In the nineteenth century a different political morality was dominant. Jeremy Bentham declared natural rights nonsense on stilts, and lawyers of that opinion created the idea of absolute parliamentary sovereignty. Now the wheel is turning again: utilitarianism is giving way once again to a recognition of individual rights, now called human rights, and parliamentary sovereignty is no longer evidently just. The status of Parliament as lawgiver, among the most fundamental of legal issues, has once again become a deep question of political morality. Law is effectively integrated with morality: lawyers and judges are working political philosophers of a democratic state.

American constitutional lawyers have debated whether the very abstract substantive constitutional clauses—those, for example, that guarantee rights to free speech and religion, to freedom from cruel and unusual punishment, to equal protection of the laws, and to due process of law—should be read as moral principles.⑱ But interpretation of the more concrete clauses of the document has usually been thought to depend on history, not morality. Two recent Supreme Court cases illustrate that assumption. The first of these turned on the Second Amendment’s guarantee of some constitutional right to firearms. The Court offered an extended discussion of English law in the eighteenth and earlier centuries to support its ruling that this amendment grants individual citizens rights against a flat prohibition on handguns. The dissenting arguments appealed to the same period of history to contradict that conclusion.⑲ The second case arose under a constitutional clause that allows Congress to suspend the right of habeas corpus only in special circumstances but does not specify who is otherwise entitled to the writ. A 5–4 majority of the Court held that aliens detained at Guantánamo Bay were entitled to habeas corpus.⑳ The strongly worded dissenting opinion insisted that only classes of people who were entitled to the writ in the eighteenth century were entitled to it now.㉑ The majority opinion did not object to that claim, but ruled that the history was inconclusive and held that the alien detainees could therefore bring actions under the writ.

The Court’s debates in these cases would make some sense if we adopted the two-systems model of law and political morality. History might then seem decisive in deciding how the Constitution’s more technical clauses should be read. But history seems much less relevant once we accept that constitutional interpretation aims at making best sense of the Constitution’s words as provision for just government. The circumstances of the eighteenth century were entirely different from those that confront any nation now, and practice then was governed in good part by moral and political standards we long ago rejected. We must therefore do our best, within the constraints of interpretation, to make our country’s fundamental law what our sense of justice would approve, not because we must sometimes compromise law with morality, but because that is exactly what the law, properly understood, itself requires.

===============================================================================

➀ This chapter is meant to supplement my books Law’s Empire (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1986) and Justice in Robes (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2006), not substitute for them.

➁ According to what is called “soft” positivism, morality can figure among the tests of law if some legal document with historical pedigree, like a constitution, so stipulates. See H. L. A. Hart, The Concept of Law, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994), postscript, 250, 265.

➂ These distinctions among legal concepts are explained more fully in my Justice in Robes, introduction.

➃ Ronald Dworkin, Taking Rights Seriously (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1977), chapter 2.

➄ Ibid., chapter 3.

➅ Stephen Guest and Philip Schofield have pointed out to me, however, that in his A Fragment of Government Jeremy Bentham candidly bases his fundamental “arrangement” of legal materials on the moral principle of utility. The text is available at www.efm.bris.ac.uk/het/bentham/government.htm. So Bentham, widely regarded as the most important of the early positivists, once based his analysis of law on moral theory, not conceptual analysis. Bentham was a closet interpretivist.

➆ Hart, The Concept of Law.

➇ Ibid.

➈ Charles de Montesquieu, The Spirit of the Laws (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989).

➉ I drew a pertinent contrast between the justice and the integrity of a legal system. See my Law’s Empire, particularly chapter 11.

⑪ For a political argument in favor of originalism, see Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1999). See my response to Scalia in that book, pp. 115–27. For a recent discussion arguing against the assumption that historical meaning is objective, see Tara Smith, “Originalism’s Misplaced Fidelity: ‘Original’ Meaning Is not Objective,” Constitutional Commentary 26, no. 1 (2009): 1. See also my Law’s Empire, chapter 9.

⑫ The legal question whether the Fugitive Slave Act was valid law includes the question whether it was constitutionally valid. In my view it was not—see “The Law of the Slave-Catchers,” Times Literary Supplement, December 5, 1975 (a review of Justice Accused, by Robert Cover). But I am prescinding from that issue now.

⑬ Jamal Kiyemba v. Barack Obama, decided February 18, 2009, Opinion of Senior Circuit Court Judge Randolph. The court was speaking arguendo. It did not hold that the detainees had a constitutional right to enter the United States.

⑭ Sager, “Material Rights, Underenforcement, and the Adjudication Thesis,” in Symposium: Justice for Hedgehogs: A Conference on Ronald Dworkin’s Forthcoming Book (special issue), Boston University Law Review 90, no. 2 (April 2010) (hereafter BU): 579.

⑮ Robert G. Bone is an exception. He offers an illuminating account of the moral dimension of procedural issues (Bone, “Procedure, Participation, Rights,” BU: 1011). He discusses, among other topics, my article “Principle, Policy, Procedure,” in my book A Matter of Principle (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1985).

⑯ “Edward Coke’s Reports,” in The Selected Writings of Sir Edward Coke, vol. 1 (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2003), 1–520.

⑰ See Jeffrey Jowell, “Immigration Wars,” The Guardian, March 2, 2004. See also comment on the idea by Lord Justice of Appeal Sir Stephen Sedley, “On the Move,” London Review of Books, October 8, 2009.

⑱ See Ronald Dworkin, Freedom’s Law: The Moral Reading of the American Constitution (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1996).

⑲ District of Columbia, et al., v. Dick Anthony Heller, 554 U.S. ____ (2008).

⑳ Rasul v. Bush, 542 U.S. 466 (2004).

㉑ Ibid. (Scalia dissenting).

===============================================================================

Key concepts:

general political philosophy treats legislative rights; a theory of law treats legal rights

institutionalization (405)

interpretivism (401): law includes not only the specific rules enacted in accordance with the community’s accepted practices but also the principles that provide the best moral justification for those enacted rules; law, an interpretive concept

legal positivism (401): law and morality are two completely independent systems

legal rights are those that people are entitled to enforce on demand, without further legislative intervention, in adjudicative institutions that direct the executive power of sheriff or police (406)
- immediately enforceable on demand

legislative rights (406): rights that the community’s lawmaking powers be exercised in a certain way
- of no immediate force

secondary rules (405)