Epilogue: Dignity Indivisible (417)

Once More: Truth

The big bang of the Galilean revolution made the world of value safe for science. But the new republic of ideas became itself an empire. The modern philosophers inflated the methods of physics into a totalitarian metaphysics. They invaded and occupied all the honorifics—reality, truth, fact, ground, meaning, knowledge, and being—and dictated the terms on which other bodies of thought might aspire to them. The question has now become whether and how the world of science can be made safe for value.

The great variety of isms we studied in Chapter 3 tried to meet that challenge. Philosophers become existentialists, emotivists, anti-realists, expressivists, constructivists, and anything else they could imagine. But each of these oases dried up, so each generation of philosophers imagined and wandered to a new one. That parade will not stop anytime soon. But the isms are all unsatisfactory, because the idea they share—that value judgments can’t really be true—loses any sense when the pointless italics are removed. They are all grounded, whatever their mechanics or decorations, in a supposedly external skepticism that in one way or another swallows itself.

Some philosophers—“realists”—protested against the imperial assumption, which they called “scientism.” But as we saw, mainly in Chapter 4, their break with establishment metaphysics was for the most part not a clean one: they worried still about how judgments of value might satisfy at least some minimal test the metaphysics of science had set, some test of convergence or ground or the power to explain facts of conviction or behavior. Once we take seriously enough the profound independence of morality, ethics, and other forms of value, however, we find that none of these accommodations is necessary or works. We need a cleaner break, a new revolution. Of course, we need to distinguish responsible from irresponsible opinion. We particularly need that distinction in politics, when justice is at stake, and we cannot have the distinction without taking on ideas of truth and falsity as well. But we must find our conceptions of truth and falsity, responsibility and irresponsibility, facts and realism, within the realms of value itself—on as clean a sheet as possible. We must abandon colonial metaphysics.

We have touched on a postcolonial conception of truth many times in this book: in explaining why politics needs truth, unmasking external skepticism, defining moral responsibility, locating truth in interpretation, distinguishing interpretive concepts, and finally, in taking truth to be itself an interpretive concept. Our journey has been steadily one of liberation. Ethics and morality are independent of physics and its partners: value is in that way freestanding. We cannot certify the truth of our value judgments through physical or biological or metaphysical discoveries; no more can we impeach them that way. We must make a case, not supply evidence, for our convictions, and that distinction demands a kind of integrity in value that in turn sponsors a different account of responsibility.

Does the disappointment remain? It is hard for us, in our time, fully to escape the gravity of scientism and therefore fully to grasp the independence of value. But remember the most important lesson of Part One: there must be a right answer about the best thing to do, even if that answer is only that nothing is. That is not a trick: it is a way of reminding yourself that skepticism is not a default. Any conviction that nothing matters must be as much the target of your suspicion and doubt—and misplaced hope for external validation—as any more positive conviction. If you do think that nothing matters, remember that that is also a conclusion that other people, who think as hard and long as you, do not accept. There is no escape from the isolation of believing what others do not. Skepticism or nihilism is certainly no escape.

Remember also that there is a great deal that you do believe about how to live. If you pursue the responsibility project of Chapter 6, you will probably achieve at least some limited integrated set of opinions that carries visceral authenticity for you. If you do, what kind of hesitation or doubt would then make sense? Why shouldn’t you simply believe what you then believe? Really believe it? It cannot matter that psychodynamics or cultural history or genetic dissection, rather than truth itself, explains why you believe what you do. No causal explanation of any kind could validate any conviction, including a skeptical one. True, you might have believed something else. But this is, in fact, what you do believe. You might come not to believe it later, of course. Further responsible reflection might produce that change. But if you have been responsible, you have no reason, pending further reflection, not to believe—fully believe—what you believe. This is not quietism: there is nothing it asks us to be quiet about. It is only telling it like it is.

What if you have not managed confidence in any even rough opinion about how best to live, not even that there is no best way to live? You are uncertain. But uncertainty too, as we saw, assumes that there is truth to be had. You may well find, as you live, that you are following some opinion. Perhaps, as Sartre supposed, you are building a style though you never pause to notice it. Or you may confront your problem more self-consciously: climb a mountain, find a guru, or join a mystic movement. Or you might not: you might lead your life as just one damn thing after another, not defiant in your skepticism but only aimless because you lack even that. You are then, at least in my opinion, not living well. But there is nothing to be done except to wait. Perhaps only for Godot.

Good Lives and Living Well (419)

We wanted not simply to identify the independence of value but to find at least a rough template for the unity of value. We wanted to vindicate a hedgehog’s search for justice in a much more inclusive theory of ethics and morality. I end by returning to the core ethical issue in our structure.

Someone lives well when he senses and pursues a good life for himself and does so with dignity: with respect for the importance of other people’s lives and for their ethical responsibility as well as his own. The two ethical ideals—living well and having a good life—are different. We can live well without having a good life: we may suffer bad luck or great poverty or serious injustice or a terrible disease and a premature death. The value of our striving is adverbial; it does not lie in the goodness or impact of the life realized. That is why people who live and die in great poverty can nevertheless live well. Even so we must each do what we can to make our own life as good as it could have been. You live badly if you do not try hard enough to make your life good.

The most arresting focus for life is death. We study a life best retrospectively, as it appears near its end. Then we cannot escape the question whether the joys and tears, the glitter and prizes and treats, have come to anything that can quiet the dread or do more than mock the silliness of having cared. Our two principles of dignity seem most stark from that perspective. The second commands us to take personal responsibility for the choices that we have made. We concentrated in Part Five on the political dimension of that responsibility: though we are never free of the vocabularies and pressures of our culture, we must nevertheless insist on freedom from domination. The positive requirements are equally important. A constantly examined life is narcissistic; a poor life. But living well must include some awareness, from time to time, of the values the life exhibits or denies; living must be more than finding oneself pulled by unexamined habit through worn grooves of expectation and reward. The wholly unexamined life, as the ancient philosophers warned us, is also a bad one. Some effective ethical conviction, at least sometimes engaged, is essential to responsibility in living.

There are dimensions to authenticity. Doing it your way is creative even if the “it” that you do is familiar. Style counts; in my view it counts very much. But style is not enough: appraisal is also important. You do not live as well as you might if you have never had occasion to reflect on what living well means for you in your situation. Skepticism might be the cost of that examination: you may come to think that nothing matters in how you live. But living with that thought, right or wrong, gives you more dignity than never even to have considered the possibility. For many people a good life is one observant in a particular religion. They may be right or wrong in the cosmology this assumes, but in either case their lives lack full dignity if they have never even pondered that cosmology.

Our first principle has a different, more substantive, force. Good lives are not trivial, and someone’s life does not achieve the needed importance just because he thinks it does. Someone who spends his life in the trivial hobby I mentioned—collecting matchbook covers—does not create a good life, even if his collection is of unmatched completeness and even if he acts always with great dignity, always treating others with proper respect for the importance of their lives. His life may be good for some other reason; otherwise it is wasted.

It is difficult to say what gives weight as well as dignity to a life: what else it needs to make it good. Some people’s lives are made good by great and durable achievement, but as we noticed this can be true for only very few people.➀ Most good lives are good for much more transitory effects: for skill in some challenging craft or raising a family or making the lives of other people better. There are a thousand ways in which a life can be good; but many more ways, other than triviality, in which it can be bad, or at least less good than it might have been.

It can be bad through poverty, but the economics of good and bad lives are complex. I summarize now a distinction and a point I made earlier and elsewhere.➁ When I come to consider what life would be good for me, I must distinguish between two aspects of my situation: the parameters that affect the answer—my culture, background, talents, tastes, and allegiances—and the limitations that make it difficult or impossible for me to lead the life—or any of the lives—that those parameters pick out as good. Disease and physical handicaps count as limitations, not parameters; they do not help to define what lives would be good for me but may rather doom me to a bad one.

My material resources and economic, social, and political opportunities may, however, be either parameters or limitations. I must count those that are due entirely to the stage of economic development that my community has reached as parameters: I cannot suppose that my life is bad just because my historical period or geographical platform has not achieved the prosperity that other generations or more prosperous continents will know or have known. If, on the other hand, my resource or opportunity is less because I or my community have been treated unjustly, then that injustice is a limitation, not a parameter. Whether relative poverty defines or blights a life depends, that is, on whether the poverty is unjust. Even if people who are cheated by modern society have substantially more resources than their ancestors had in some distant and just past, those ancestors may have been better placed to lead good lives.

Plato and other moralists argued that an unjust distribution of wealth has ethical disadvantages not only for those who have too little but also for those who have too much. Someone unjustly rich must devote more of his life to politics if he is to retain his self-respect than he would otherwise wish or think fulfilling. He owes duties of political association to other members of his political community, and these include doing what he can to secure justice for them. In an age of participatory politics this must be more than just voting for justice. So long as politics is financed through private funds, he must give resources to politicians that he would rather use for his own life, and he must do whatever else would significantly help. His time is no longer his own.

Grave injustice—a nation split between affluence and desperate poverty—has further and even more dramatic consequences for the relatively affluent: it makes it difficult for most of them to lead as good a life as they could in less unjust circumstances. Some of them, who have remarkable talent in some direction, can use their greater wealth more effectively to pursue lives of genuine achievement. The ethical question, for them, is whether they can do so with dignity. For the rest—the untalented rich—the impact of injustice on their lives is pervasive, because it counts against the value of a life that it is led with other people’s money, and nothing they can do with their additional wealth can make up that value shortfall.➂ Rich suffer as well as poor, though the poor are usually more aware of their misfortune.

Cultures have tried to teach a malign and apparently persuasive lie: that the most important metric of a good life is wealth and the luxury and power it brings. The rich think they live better when they are even richer. In America and many other places they use their wealth politically, to persuade the public to elect or accept leaders who will do that for them. They say that the justice we have imagined is socialism that threatens our freedom. Not everyone is gullible: many people lead contented lives without wealth. But many others are persuaded; they vote for low taxes to keep the jackpot full in case they too can win it, even though that is a lottery they are almost bound to lose. Nothing better illustrates the tragedy of an unexamined life: there are no winners in this macabre dance of greed and delusion. No respectable or even intelligible theory of value supposes that making and spending money has any value or importance in itself and almost everything people buy with that money lacks any importance as well. The ridiculous dream of a princely life is kept alive by ethical sleepwalkers. And they in turn keep injustice alive because their self-contempt breeds a politics of contempt for others. Dignity is indivisible.

But remember, finally, the truth as well as its corruption. The justice we have imagined begins in what seems an unchallengeable proposition: that government must treat those under its dominion with equal concern and respect. That justice does not threaten—it expands—our liberty. It does not trade freedom for equality or the other way around. It does not cripple enterprise for the sake of cheats. It favors neither big nor small government but only just government. It is drawn from dignity and aims at dignity. It makes it easier and more likely for each of us to live a good life well. Remember, too, that the stakes are more than mortal. Without dignity our lives are only blinks of duration. But if we manage to lead a good life well, we create something more. We write a subscript to our mortality. We make our lives tiny diamonds in the cosmic sands.

===============================================================================

➀ For an illuminating account of lives thought good, see Keith Thomas, The Ends of Life: Roads to Fulfillment in Early Modern England (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009), reviewed by Hilary Mantel, “Dreams and Duels of England,” New York Review of Books, October 22, 2009.

➁ “Foundations of Liberal Equality,” The Tanner Lectures on Human Values, vol. 11 (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1990); Ronald Dworkin, Sovereign Virtue: The Theory and Practice of Equality (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000), chapter 6, “Equality and the Good Life.”

➂ I explain this difficulty in more detail in Sovereign Virtue, chapter 6.