Chapter 2 Terrorism and Human Rights

Terrorism, Rights, and Security

Thousands of fanatics around the world would be glad to die if they could kill Westerners—particularly Americans. They created an unbelievable catastrophe in September 2001, and they may already have weapons of apocalyptic murder that could dwarf the horror of that destruction. We are angry and we are also frightened. Information is our main defense; the more we know about the resources, identity, leaders, and plans of the terrorists the safer we are. One source of information is people: the people our military and police believe may be terrorists themselves or may at least have information about terrorists that would be useful to us. Americans disagree about what our government may do to those people to extract whatever information they have. Controversy has centered on three practices: surveillance, coercive interrogation, and indefinite detention.

Soon after September 11, 2001, Congress adopted a law authorizing new forms of surveillance so quickly that few senators or representatives had a chance even to read it. Though the law, called the USA Patriot Act, usefully allowed improved communication among federal agencies, it also allowed the government novel and—to liberals—frightening powers to invade privacy; it allowed it, for example, to conduct secret searches of people’s homes without even informing them later that their homes had been searched, and to compel libraries to report the books people had borrowed. A coalition of Democrats and moderate Republicans forced the administration to eliminate some of the act’s most objectionable provisions when Congress renewed it in 2006, but several of the new powers of surveillance that threaten individual privacy remain. In early 2006, the New York Times reported that President Bush had instituted an extensive program of secretly wiretapping both citizens and foreigners without securing the judicial warrants that federal statutes require. The president admitted the practice. He and his aides claimed that it was legal—among other grounds, because the president’s constitutional power as commander in chief allows him to override the ordinary law—but few lawyers agreed.➀

The Bush administration has not formally conceded that it has ordered the torture of suspected terrorists in American detention camps or “rendered” them to other countries for torture. But it is very widely assumed that it has done both, and the secretary of state, Condoleezza Rice, all but admitted this in response to criticism by European leaders after it was reported that the United States had established detention centers on their territories. The administration’s Justice Department prepared and circulated memorandums arguing that the president has the legal power to order torture even though this is forbidden by law; the argument relies once again on the Constitution’s declaration that the president is commander in chief. It is controversial, in any case, what constitutes torture; the administration apparently denies that certain terrifying practices, like repeatedly pouring water over a blindfolded prisoner’s head to create the sensation that he is drowning, count as torture.

The United States now detains hundreds of prisoners indefinitely, without charge or trial, at Guantánamo and at other places around the world. The Bush administration says that these detainees are enemy combatants, but it will not try them or even inform them or the public of the evidence on which it draws that conclusion. We do not treat even the most dangerous of ordinary domestic criminals—those we suspect of serial murder or running drug rings, for instance—that way. Our Constitution forbids imprisoning such people just because they are dangerous or because they have information that would help us to prevent murder and other crimes. We have developed, over centuries, a jurisprudence of criminal justice that insists that the police must soon release people they have arrested but either will not or cannot prosecute. We also insist that those who are tried must be protected by procedures that so far as is practicable prevent unjust conviction. We say that it is better that a thousand guilty people go free than that one innocent person be punished. But the Bush administration has set aside all these constraints and protections on the ground that it can protect Americans more effectively against future terrorist attacks in that way.

All these policies of surveillance, coercive interrogation, and detention are novel, and they are admittedly extreme. They are all controversial, and the controversy in general, though not perfectly, tracks the liberal-conservative division we are now exploring. Many Americans approve of the administration’s tough new policies. They say that our safety is now more gravely threatened than ever before and that we must, as it is often put, strike a new balance between security and freedom. Many other Americans disagree; they say that the new balance the administration has struck is too great a compromise of freedom, that the emergency is not grave enough to justify what the government has done and is still doing.

The controversy is partly about the best interpretation of American law and of the treaties America has signed and ratified. Some liberals argue that the more extreme provisions of the USA Patriot Act are unconstitutional, and most lawyers believe that the president acted illegally in ordering wiretaps with no judicial warrant. Many critics argue that the indefinite detention of suspected terrorists is unconstitutional because even foreigners have a constitutional right to the traditional procedures and protections that we guarantee to ordinary domestic criminals. In a very important decision in 2004, the Supreme Court held that the government had violated the Constitution by not allowing foreigners in Guantánamo Bay to contest their detention before proper tribunals.➁

But the legal issue is not at the center of the disagreement because Bush’s supporters think that the law is in any case anachronistic and should be changed. They say that the regime of constitutional and legal rights that American law has developed over centuries was made obsolete by the September 11 attack, that we need, in language I just mentioned, a new legal balance between security and the rights of an accused. So the real argument is a moral, not a legal, one.

The image of striking a new balance is popular, but it is also peculiarly inapt. It suggests that “we”—Americans in general—must decide what mixture of security and personal freedom we want for ourselves, in much the same way as we decide how elaborate a network of intercity roads we want once we know how much such roads cost and their impact on the countryside. The issues we actually face are very different, however, and the balancing metaphor obscures those issues. We must decide not where our own interest lies on balance but the very different question of what morality requires, even at the expense of our own interests, and we cannot answer that question by asking whether the benefits of our policy outweigh its costs to us.

Many conservatives believe that America is morally entitled to use untraditional weapons to combat an untraditional threat. They believe that the terrorists have forfeited any right to our concern by their barbarous actions and intentions and that the president has a duty and therefore a right to put American safety first and to do whatever he and his advisers think helpful to that end. In some part they rely on claims of fact that are false or dubious: they supported the war in Iraq, for example, because they accepted the president’s claim that Iraq had a stockpile of terrible weapons, which they now know was not true, and also his claim that Iraq abetted the terrorist attack of 2001, which is equally false but which many of them still believe. But the deep dispute about America’s antiterrorist policies is not centrally a disagreement about facts. It is about whether these policies violate human rights. If they do, they are indefensible even if they are legal and even if they do make Americans safer.

We use the concept of human rights to describe the most basic and universal of all rights; there is no more serious complaint against a government than that it has violated human rights. The United States and other nations invoke the idea to justify extreme sanctions; we refuse financial aid or economic advantage to countries that we accuse of human rights violations, and we try to stop other nations or agencies from helping them. We believe that in some circumstances we are justified even in invading those countries to prevent such violations. We cannot claim that human rights were made obsolete by September 11 because we believe such rights to be timeless. We cannot claim a privilege to disregard them when we believe our own security to be threatened because we insist that states must respect these rights no matter what reason they might have for violating them. So it is natural for the administration’s critics to appeal to human rights when much of the public seems indifferent to legal rights.

We must be careful, however, to distinguish two somewhat different claims that critics make. Following the Second World War, a great number of nations entered into a variety of international treaties, charters, and covenants listing certain human rights and agreeing to respect those rights. These include, for example, the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights, the European Convention on Human Rights, and the Geneva Conventions that set out rules for the definition and treatment of prisoners of war. Some critics charge that America’s treatment of accused terrorists violates its obligations under one or another of these treaties. There is a good deal of controversy among international lawyers about whether that charge is valid. The Bush administration argues, for example, that those prisoners it accuses of having fought for the Taliban or Al-Qaeda in Afghanistan are not entitled to the protections of the Geneva Conventions because they are “illegal combatants.” A United States Court of Appeals has accepted that argument, but a great many leading international lawyers reject it, and I agree with them.➂

This controversy about human rights is essentially a legal one because it turns on the correct interpretation of international treaties and other documents. Other critics make a different and more fundamental charge: that our detention policy violates what we might call true or genuine human rights, the rights that all human beings have just because they are human, the rights that the treaties should protect, the rights no nation should be permitted to violate even for reasons of security. The international treaties aimed to identify and protect these very basic human rights. But the treaties were inevitably compromises among different nations with different traditions and interests, and they are often criticized as failing to capture genuine human rights fully or accurately. Some nations and groups, particularly from the third world, believe that most of the treaties are defective because they neglect economic rights, for instance, and also because some of the alleged human rights they include are only parochial ideas recognized in the traditions of a few powerful Western nations, including (according to much third-world opinion) rights of free speech and of a free press. So even if the Bush administration were right in its legal opinion that the Geneva Conventions and other treaties technically do not apply to the Guantánamo detainees, the moral question would still remain whether our policies there and elsewhere do violate the detainees’ underlying human rights, rights that the United States would act immorally, even if not illegally, in violating.

That second, moral question must be our question now. Americans apparently disagree sharply in the answer they give to it, and the disagreement seems to run at least roughly along the now-familiar red-blue lines. Liberals attack our detention and other antiterrorist policies, and conservatives defend them. This is one of the deep fissures that prompt critics to say that we are now a polarized nation. But though we disagree, we do not argue. There is no national debate about what human rights the detainees have, or even about what human rights are.

What Are Human Rights?

Politically conscious people use the concept of human rights freely; they use it, as I said, to make the gravest political accusations and to justify serious political sanctions, sometimes including war. But many of them would find it hard to say what a human right is. They not only disagree about what a proper list of human rights should contain—whether it should include economic rights or rights to free speech, for example—but find it difficult even to define a test for their claims, to provide an account of how we should decide which alleged rights do belong on such a list. These are important questions that require us to reflect more carefully about the very idea of a human right. If we are to make any progress in constructing a national debate about the morality of our antiterrorist policies, we must first confront that philosophical issue directly. Then, in the next section, we can return to the political controversies.

Legal and Political Rights. What are human rights? How do they differ from legal rights and less fundamental moral rights? We understand the idea of a legal right well enough. Government creates and enforces legal rights for a variety of reasons. A nation cannot have a functioning economy, for instance, unless its laws create and protect legal rights in property so that people can count on retaining what they earn in labor or trade. Some legal rights, which we call constitutional rights, have a special force and role: they prevent government from enacting laws or adopting policies that would otherwise seem attractive. The First Amendment to the United States Constitution creates legal rights of that kind; it gives citizens a right to speak that government may not abridge even when it would be in the general interest to do so. We often justify such constitutional rights by saying that people already have a moral right to what the Constitution makes into a legal right. The moral rights we have in mind are special because they are rights not against other people as individuals but against governments, and I shall therefore refer to these special moral rights as political rights.

Most legitimate acts of any government involve trade-offs of different people’s interests; these acts benefit some citizens and disadvantage others in order to improve the community’s well-being on the whole. When Congress stipulates a tariff on particular imports, a tax on particular luxuries, or a subsidy for farmers growing a particular crop, or when a state or city decides to build an airport, a sports stadium, or a new highway in one place rather than another, that decision helps some citizens and harms others. It is justified if its overall effect, taking account of the gains to some citizens and losses to others, is beneficial. If it really is best for everyone overall to build the airport near my house rather than yours, I have no legitimate complaint against that decision.

But certain interests of particular people are so important that it would be wrong—morally wrong—for the community to sacrifice those interests just to secure an overall benefit. Political rights mark off and protect these particularly important interests. A political right, we may say, is a trump over the kind of trade-off argument that normally justifies political action. The First Amendment gives Americans a legal right to be free from political censorship; we explain why that legal right is desirable by supposing that people have a political right to speak their mind that is sufficiently important to be protected legally in that way. (I consider some of the reasons why people are thought to have that political right in chapter 5.) The Constitution also gives Americans legal rights that guarantee them a fair trial if they are accused of a crime; we justify those legal rights by insisting that people already have a political right not to be jailed without a fair trial even if imprisonment would in some way benefit the community overall. We appeal to political rights not only to explain and justify legal rights in this way but also to criticize government for not adopting legal rights that we think it should adopt. Americans who think that affirmative action—giving members of minorities special preference in university admissions and in hiring—is wrong often appeal to a political right to justify their opposition. They say that majority students or job applicants have a right not to be put at a disadvantage in that way even if the community as a whole would benefit. Other people, who deny that affirmative action is unfair, say that there is no such political right.➃

Someone who claims a political right makes a very strong claim: that government cannot properly do what might be in the community’s overall best interests. He must show why the individual interests he cites are so important that they justify that strong claim. If we accept the two principles of human dignity that I described in the last chapter, we can look to those principles for that justification. We can insist that people have political rights to whatever protection is necessary to respect the equal importance of their lives and their sovereign responsibility to identify and create value in their own lives. We can insist, for example, on that ground, that people have a political right not to suffer discrimination because their race has been despised, and also a political right to speak their own mind on matters of public controversy. It would be wrong for government to discriminate against them or to censor their political speech even if that would for some reason benefit the rest of the community. In my view, the list of constitutional rights in the United States Constitution, as these have been interpreted by American courts over recent decades, does a reasonably good job of identifying and protecting the political rights that flow from the two principles of dignity and converting those political rights into legal rights. So do the constitutional documents and international covenants of many other nations and of international communities, in part because they were able to learn from American constitutional practice, just as America can now learn from theirs.

Nevertheless, we must now notice that nations differ strikingly about which political rights to recognize in that way. Even those nations that belong to the same general political culture as our own disagree with us in important matters. In Britain and several other European nations, for example, people have a legal right not to be publicly insulted because of their race; that right is protected by laws making “hate speech” a crime. In the United States, on the contrary, people have a constitutional right publicly to insult anyone they like, by denigrating that person’s race or any other group to which he belongs, so long as they do not provoke a riot or incite others to criminal acts. This reflects a good-faith difference in understanding the two principles of dignity: in America, but not in Europe, the reigning opinion holds that respecting people’s personal responsibility for their own values means allowing them to challenge even the most fundamental assumptions of democratic society, including the assumption that people’s lives are of equal intrinsic value and importance.

The differences in the political rights recognized by nations of radically different moral and religious culture are of course even greater. In many political communities women are subject to a variety of disabilities and constraints that to Americans seem to signal that women are not regarded as of equal importance in those communities. In many communities rights of political participation that we take to be axiomatic are unknown; many states are not even formally democratic, and many of those that claim to be democratic permit only one political party and deny rights of freedom of press and speech that we think indispensable to a genuine democracy. On the other hand, as I said, the United States is widely criticized for not recognizing rights that are firmly recorded in some of the constitutions of many other, particularly newer, countries—social and economic rights, as these are called, to decent housing, medical care, and even jobs.

Human Rights. Now we may ask how human rights differ from the important political rights we have just been considering. I do not mean to ask—yet—which particular rights we should count as human rights. I mean rather to ask how we should understand the idea of a human right so as to justify the common assumption that human rights are political rights but special and very important kinds of political rights. Violations of even important political rights do not ordinarily justify other nations’ invading the offending nation or deliberately damaging its economy. Writers are now in jail in Germany, for example, for charging that the Jews largely invented the Holocaust. Americans might criticize Germany for infringing in that way what we take to be a very important political right of free speech, but no one would think that this gives the United States grounds for invading Germany or for imposing trade sanctions against it. When other governments violate what we take to be not only political but human rights, however—when they jail and torture their critics or systematically hunt out and kill members of a minority religion or race—we at least contemplate the possibility of grave sanctions to try to stop these crimes.

So the distinction between political and human rights is very important in practice, and political philosophers disagree about how it should be drawn. Some of them recommend an empirical rather than a judgmental test; they suggest that we designate as human rights only those political rights that are very widely recognized in the practices of nations of all major religious and political cultures. The appeal of that approach is obvious: it protects us against the charge that our conception of human rights is parochial or drawn from a single cultural tradition. But its disadvantage is equally obvious. It would bar us from claiming that patent injustices like wholesale and crippling discrimination against minorities or women, which are traditional in some cultures, are violations of human rights. It would rob the concept of a human right of much of its critical force.

If we are to justify the special role that the idea of human rights plays in domestic and international politics, we must define human rights more critically. Other philosophers therefore suggest that human rights are different from ordinary political rights because the former are in some way more important to people. That suggestion faces a different kind of difficulty, however. We treat all the rights that figure in political argument as of very great importance—we insist that they act as trumps over normal political justification—and we explain that they have that great importance because violations would offend one of the principles that we take to define human dignity. What could be more important than that? If we think that Germany’s laws that infringe free speech violate the dignity of its citizens, then why do we not count them as violations of human rights? Why are we then not justified in invading Germany to stop this practice?

We do better to explain the idea of human rights, I suggest, not by trying to establish grades of damage that governments inflict when they make good-faith mistakes in identifying people’s moral rights but instead by distinguishing good-faith mistakes made by governments that respect human dignity in principle from those acts that show only contempt for or indifference to human dignity. The fundamental human right, we should say, is the right to be treated with a certain attitude: an attitude that expresses the understanding that each person is a human being whose dignity matters. A government can respect that human right even if it makes mistakes in identifying which more concrete political rights it must respect, so long as its mistake is honest. The two principles we have identified give minimum content to that popular idea. Someone’s most basic human right, from which all the other human rights flow, is his right to be treated by those in power in a way that is not inconsistent with their accepting that his life is of intrinsic importance and that he has a personal responsibility for realizing value in his own life. Of course, accepting these principles means understanding the limits of what they might intelligibly be thought to countenance. It would not excuse a nation from genocide if its leaders believed that it was good for the people slaughtered to die so that they could be converted to the true faith in heaven. No one who understood the meaning of people being in charge of their own lives could think that that policy respected that principle.

This account of human rights has so far been necessarily very abstract, and I must now try to illustrate it with concrete examples. The basic requirement that government show respect for human dignity functions in two ways, and the distinction between these is of great practical importance. First, that basic requirement is the source of what we might call baseline human rights: the concrete rights, like the right not to be tortured, that set limits to how any government may act. These rights forbid acts that could not be justified by any intelligible interpretation of the ideas that people’s lives are of equal intrinsic value and that they have a personal responsibility for their own lives. They are the concrete rights that human rights covenants and treaties try to identify.

But, second, the basic requirement has a further, continuing, and distinct force. It forbids any government to act toward anyone in a way that contradicts its own understanding of those values—the understanding embedded in its own laws and practices—because that contradiction would just as dramatically deny respect for the humanity of its victims.

Baseline Violations

People and nations can disagree widely but nevertheless in good faith about the best interpretation of each of the two principles of human dignity. That is why different nations recognize somewhat different political rights to enact as legal or constitutional rights. The American understanding of the requirements of personal responsibility, as announced by its Supreme Court, differs from the European understanding and even more dramatically from the understanding in more distant cultures. Germany acts in good faith in punishing those who deny the Holocaust even though, in the opinion of Americans who accept their own traditions, it acts wrongly. It is mistaken about political rights, American lawyers think, but it would be unreasonable for them to deny that it has at least acted on an intelligible understanding of what it means to respect people’s equal importance and their personal responsibility.

But some acts of government are so obviously inconsistent with the principles of human dignity that they cannot be thought to be justified by any intelligible conception of those principles. We must draft our core list of human rights to restrict violations to acts of that character. Of course there is room for disagreement about where the line is to be drawn; there is no mechanical test. That explains why people disagree as they do about, for example, whether human rights include economic rights. But it also explains the great measure of agreement we have achieved in identifying at least some acts as plainly in violation of human rights.

Start with the first principle of dignity, the principle that declares the intrinsic and equal importance of every human life, and start with obvious cases. The most glaring example of contempt for this principle lies in blatant prejudice and discrimination: in assumptions of supposed superiority of one caste over another, of believers over infidels, of Aryans over Semites, or of whites over blacks. It is most horribly evident in the ambitions of genocide. Sometimes the contempt is more personal; people in power sometimes humiliate, rape, or torture their victims just as a demonstration of contempt or, what comes to the same thing, just for amusement. That is what happened to America’s prisoners at Abu Ghraib. No nation that supposes that some people are of inferior stock or that condones humiliation and torture for amusement can even begin to claim that it embraces an intelligible conception of human dignity.

Now look briefly at the second principle, which insists that individuals have a personal responsibility to determine the values that define success in their lives. That principle supports the traditional liberal rights of free speech and expression, conscience, political activity, and religion that most human rights documents include. I said earlier that different nations and cultures take different views about how those liberal rights should be defined and protected. Societies also differ about what we might call surface paternalism. Most of us think that compulsory education until late adolescence and mandatory seat belts are permissible forms of paternalism because the first unqualifiedly enhances rather than diminishes a person’s capacity to take charge of his own life and the second only helps people to achieve what they actually want, in spite of moments of acknowledged weakness. Some societies are more paternalistic than that but do not violate human rights unless the level of interference could not plausibly be understood in that way. These different political cultures, we might say, take different views about how the personal responsibility of individuals is to be protected.

But once again some acts of government express not a goodfaith effort to define and enforce that responsibility but rather a denial of personal responsibility altogether. Governments that forbid the exercise of any but a designated religion or that punish heresy or blasphemy or deny in principle the right of free speech or of the press violate human rights for that reason. So do governments that intimidate, kill, or torture people because they hate or want to change their political opinions. Orwell’s novel 1984 remains the classic account of government that usurps an individual’s own judgment of the values that should define his life and imposes a single collective ethical judgment on everyone. More than two decades after the date of Orwell’s projected nightmare, some nations claim the same authority. They too deny the human rights of their members and subjects.

The right not to be tortured has long been thought the paradigm human right, first on everyone’s list. Pain is horrible, but torture is not just a matter of pain. It is sometimes inflicted as a grotesque emblem of power and subjugation, and it violates human rights for that reason. But torture is also used as a tactic in defense of security, and then the case against it must be more complicated. Bush’s attorney general, Alberto Gonzales, argued in his confirmation hearings that coercive interrogation, which may include various levels of torture, is a particularly effective means of discovering the information we need to save Americans’ lives. That claim is controversial: many experts on interrogation believe that information obtained through torture is almost always useless. But we must nevertheless ask whether torture would still violate human rights even if Gonzales is right. Yes, it would, because torture’s object is precisely not just to damage but to destroy a human being’s power to decide for himself what his loyalty and convictions permit him to do. Offering inducements such as a reduced sentence to an accused criminal in exchange for information, however objectionable this might seem on other grounds, leaves a prisoner’s ability to weigh costs and consequences intact. Torture is designed to extinguish that power, to reduce its victim to a screaming animal for whom decision is no longer possible—the most profound insult to his humanity, the most profound outrage of his human rights.

Now consider a much more controversial example. Capital punishment is practiced in the majority of American states. I believe that capital punishment is morally wrong. I also believe (though I know that most American constitutional lawyers disagree) that the Supreme Court was correct in its original holding, which it later reversed, that capital punishment is unconstitutional because it is cruel and unusual punishment and is therefore in violation of the Constitution’s Eighth Amendment. But is capital punishment not only morally wrong and unconstitutional but also a violation of human rights? Many people think so; capital punishment is outlawed in many constitutions, and the laws of the European Union forbid the extradition of any accused criminal to a nation in which he might be subject to execution.

But the case that capital punishment violates human rights is at best inconclusive on the baseline test because two distinct sets of belief might be thought to reconcile human dignity with death as punishment. The first holds that the practice is a significant deterrent to murder. If so, then an adequate case can be made that the practice kills the guilty only to save the innocent and so does not deny the equal intrinsic importance of human lives. It might be objected that there is no persuasive evidence that the death penalty has any important deterrent effect. I agree. But it does not follow that any person who claims to think that the death penalty does deter murder must be insincere. The second holds that capital punishment is justified even if it does not deter because the community is entitled to retribution for murder and that killing a murderer brings what is often called, in an odious phrase, “closure” to the relatives of a murder victim and to society at large. Some prominent moralists who are distinguished for their sensitivity to dignity have endorsed this thesis. I find the thesis deeply unattractive, but I cannot say that anyone who accepts it reveals his underlying contempt for human dignity or for the intrinsic value of a human life. There are important arguments on the other side, however. No jury, no matter how fair and circumspect, can wholly eliminate the possibility of having convicted an innocent person, and it might well seem contemptuous of human life to run that risk. In American practice, the death penalty is inflicted disproportionately on black defendants, and it is difficult not to suspect the stain of racism in those decisions. But the case that capital punishment violates human rights seems, as I said, at best inconclusive as a baseline matter. We can understand the opinion of those who think it does, but they would no doubt agree that it would be preposterous for other nations to invade Texas or Florida to stop the practice, even if they were powerful enough to succeed.

Now we may turn, finally, to the issue that immediately concerns us. Do America’s policies for combating the terrorist threat violate baseline human rights, the rights any nation, no matter what its traditions and practices, must respect? Certainly torture violates baseline rights, whatever the Bush administration’s lawyers may say. Most Americans would agree with that judgment, and the administration formally denies that it tortures its prisoners. So we should now concentrate on the detention policies that the administration concedes it follows and that a great many Americans would defend. We imprison hundreds of people indefinitely without charge or trial on the basis of only an executive determination that these people are dangerous enemies, a determination that is not subject to ordinary review by courts. Does this policy violate those prisoners’ baseline human rights?

I shall try to construct an argument on behalf of Americans who think it does not. Our detention policy is based on suppositions of fact that these Americans believe would justify that policy if true and that are not so plainly false that no reasonable person could accept them. America faces a continuing threat of a massively lethal terrorist attack, and our government believes that those it detains would increase this danger if they were released, or that they are withholding information that would help America to reduce the threat, or both. That may not be true of some of the detainees. They may be innocent and pose no threat. But it is too risky to allow judges to make that determination after ordinary criminal trials because we know that such trials sometimes allow dangerous people to go free.

It is true, the argument concedes, that America must nevertheless show respect for the human dignity of the detainees. But the military does provide a process for reviewing the status of the Guantánamo detainees: it conducts hearings in which military officers examine the question, independently for each detainee, whether he was indeed an enemy combatant and if so, whether he remains a danger to the United States. A few detainees have in fact been released after such hearings apparently ruled in their favor. True, the hearings do not provide anything like the guarantees and protections that we insist on for our own citizens in normal domestic criminal trials. The detainees are not allowed counsel of their own choice. They are not informed of the evidence against them and hence are given no opportunity to challenge that evidence. There is no review of the tribunals’ decisions by judges or anyone outside the executive branch of government: in effect, the military acts as prosecutor, judge, and jury. Nevertheless, according to this argument, these minimal arrangements satisfy baseline human rights because a nation would not provide even that kind of hearing for prisoners it considers security threats unless it recognized them as human beings and accepted a responsibility to protect their dignity.

Many Americans find that a plausible argument. They conclude that the administration’s detention practices do not violate the baseline human rights that every nation must observe as a matter of moral imperative. They accept the government’s claim that the only pertinent question is whether its detention policies violate our legal commitments under the Geneva Conventions or other treaties, and they also accept the government’s assurance that they do not. I disagree, as I said, with the latter judgment; I believe that the Bush government’s detention policies do violate its obligations under international law. But what of the deeper moral question? Should we accept the argument I constructed? Or does our detention practice violate the baseline human rights that any nation, whatever its history, must respect?

We cannot say that any nation that does not offer its ordinary criminal defendants a trial as safe as those the United States allows its ordinary defendants shows contempt for the value of those defendants’ lives. Many nations have different criminal procedures from ours. Some of these do not protect the innocent as effectively as our ordinary procedures do, and we cannot say that their practices violate baseline human rights just for that reason. However, the Guantánamo hearings are less safe than even the most relaxed procedures of nations whose systems of criminal justice we respect and also less safe than the criminal procedures that many international human rights conventions demand. In early 2006, five inspectors of the United Nations Human Rights Commission declared that the Guantánamo camp should be closed because of its human rights violations. Prime Minister Tony Blair of Great Britain, America’s strongest ally in Iraq, called the camp an “anomaly,” and Britain’s attorney general, Lord Goldsmith, said that the proper way to deal with terrorist activity “is fair trial” and that the military tribunals the administration has proposed would not provide “a fair trial by standards we would accept.” So the argument that America’s detention procedures show sufficient respect for human dignity to satisfy baseline human rights seems at best weak and inconclusive. In any case, however, that is not the only human rights challenge those procedures must face.

Bad-Faith Violations

The most basic of human rights, I said, is the right to be treated by government with a certain attitude: with the respect due a human being. We have been considering baseline human rights—those more concrete rights that any nation must respect no matter what its culture or traditions. But the fundamental human right is not exhausted by these baseline rights; it requires more of particular nations because those nations’ practices may show that they regard a kind of treatment as contemptuous even though other nations do not. If so, those nations deny respect when they treat anyone in that way. Suppose a community has established and protects a particularly vigorous version of freedom of speech. If that doctrine represents its considered opinion of what human dignity requires, then it could not defend denying an equal freedom to any subgroup within the nation—or, indeed, to foreigners—as a good-faith attempt to respect the latter’s human rights. If a nation’s practice shows that it takes respect for fundamental principle to require more generous protection against imprisoning the innocent than other nations concede to their citizens, it must honor that conviction for everyone who falls into its power. If it does not, then it does not treat those it makes exceptions as fully human.

So the second test that the idea of human rights imposes, the test of consistency of respect for dignity, is a much more stringent test for the United States than the first one. The second test forbids government to act in ways that cannot be justified under the conception of dignity that the nation has embraced. The ordinary criminal-justice practices of the United States establish what we collectively believe that respect for human dignity requires for those accused of crimes, and so we do show contempt for terrorist suspects when we deny that respect to them. It would no doubt be very useful—and would certainly improve our collective safety, perhaps by a good deal—if our police could, as a matter of course, lock up ordinary citizens they thought dangerous to other people’s safety without the expense, delay, and possible embarrassment of a trial. Indeed it would be extremely useful in our war against drugs to be able to incarcerate people we had no reason to think had committed a crime at all, particularly if we thought they had information about the drug trade that we might induce them to share with us. We refuse our police those options, useful though they might be, because we think people have a right not to be injured in that very serious way even when that would make us safer and help to rid our community of very serious dangers, including the curse of drugs.

We deny ourselves this improved security because we think that depriving someone of his liberty by locking him away is a crude violation both of his status as someone whose life has intrinsic value and of his responsibility to lead his own life. Imprisonment is an extreme form of slavery. We could not justify imposing this terrible slavery on someone just marginally to improve the safety of others unless we counted his life as unimportant next to theirs. So a policy of jailing suspected criminals without charge or trial, or jailing people who have not committed a crime but whom our police judge to be dangerous, would violate what we take the dignity of human beings to require.

Of course we sometimes do inflict that slavery—even death—on those we accuse of crime, and we do it entirely to make the rest of us safer. We do that whenever we convict someone of a crime after a fair trial and punish him in those ways. But we nevertheless act consistently with our conception of human dignity because if our trials really are fair, then we can reasonably think that we have not judged the criminal’s life as less important than anyone else’s. We have not selected him to damage for the good of the rest of us; he has selected himself for that role by his deliberate decision to damage others for his own good or purposes. This justification of our treatment of the convicted criminal turns entirely on the fairness and adequacy of our procedures for judging whether the criminal has in fact selected himself in that way. That is why we make such efforts to ensure that our procedures are as fair as we can reasonably make them; that is the true explanation of our ancient assumption that it is much better to acquit the guilty, however dangerous, than to convict the innocent. We might, it is true, have developed different and less demanding standards of fairness in our criminal procedures. We might have come to think that allowing the police themselves to try those they have arrested without allowing the prisoners to know or confront the evidence against them and with no judicial review of conviction was a sufficiently fair procedure in murder cases. We might now be safer if we had formed and had followed that opinion. But we did not come to think that. On the contrary, we have come to think, as a nation, that any such procedure would not be sufficiently fair to justify the grave damage and insult of imprisonment.

We also detain people without trial in a very different kind of circumstance: when we are fighting a war and we capture enemy soldiers who have committed no crime by fighting against us. In these circumstances, our practice is governed by international law, which permits us to hold such soldiers until the end of hostilities, but only under the relatively benign conditions stipulated by the Geneva Conventions, which include living arrangements equal to those who are guarding them and forbid even limited forms of coercive interrogation. We claim that those we have imprisoned at Guantánamo and elsewhere as suspected terrorists are not entitled to those arrangements and that we may hold them until the United States is no longer at risk from terrorism (which may well be for the rest of their lives) because they have acted illegally. We treat them as criminals, though we refuse them the rights of criminals, including the most basic right to be accused of and tried for their alleged crimes. Once again, this cannot be justified if we assume that our ordinary criminal law states what we take to be the essential rights of an accused, because we cannot then claim to be acting in good faith in our protestation that this is all that the essential rights of those we suspect of terrorism demand. Instead we show only that we do not regard them as fully human.

Security and Honor

I have now set out an argument that America’s policy of imprisoning suspected terrorists indefinitely violates human rights. The argument begins in a conception of human rights that is grounded in the two basic principles of human dignity. It demands, first, that any government, whatever its traditions and practices, act consistently with some good-faith understanding of the equal intrinsic importance of people’s lives and of their personal responsibility for their own lives. It also demands, second, that nations that have developed their own distinct understanding of what these standards require not deny the benefit of that understanding to anyone. The latter demand is particularly strong in the case of the United States, and it means that, for us, our policy of indefinite imprisonment without trial violates the human rights of those we imprison.

That argument contradicts what a great many Americans think, and so we must now consider how they might oppose it. What argument could they construct to a contrary conclusion? They might, first and most fundamentally, reject the theory of human rights in which my argument begins. Some nations and some movements indeed would reject that theory because it is grounded in principles of human dignity that are far from universally shared. But think what it means to reject the principles. The Bosnian Serbs said that their genocidal programs did not violate human rights because the Muslims were not really human, and the Hutu said much the same about the Tutsis they slaughtered. If we are to accept the idea of human rights at all, then we must take a stand somewhere about who is a human being and what it means to treat someone with human dignity. We cannot be ecumenical all the way down; we must give content to these phrases, and we must rely on our own convictions to do that.

Some might object that if we insist on the conception of dignity I defined, we must be assuming that there is objective truth to be had in the realms of ethics and morality. I agree. But we must make that assumption because the opposite, skeptical claim is philosophically indefensible. I have tried to explain why in other writing,➄ and I assume that rejecting that skepticism is part of the common ground we share. Conservatives sometimes say that liberals are moral skeptics; just after his elevation, Pope Benedict XVI said that liberals embrace moral relativism. This is a mistake: both our two supposed political cultures, save for a few misguided philosophers on each side, reject relativism with equal conviction.

So I shall assume that the millions of Americans who would reject my argument would not reject the theory of human rights on which it is based. What other arguments might they make? They might challenge my claim that because Americans insist on certain procedures in their domestic criminal law, it follows that they believe that these procedures are indispensable to protecting human dignity. Certainly it would be implausible to treat certain aspects of our criminal procedures as carrying that implication. For some time the Supreme Court insisted that evidence could not be used against an accused criminal at his trial—no matter how persuasive that evidence was of his guilt—if the police had obtained the evidence illegally. That rule, which has since been withdrawn, was justified as a useful deterrent to police irregularity; no one supposed that introducing genuine evidence of an accused criminal’s guilt denies the equal importance of his life even when the police have obtained that evidence in an illegitimate way.

But the rules forbidding imprisonment without trial and requiring that an accused be permitted to know the charges and evidence against him plainly belong in a different category. They serve no secondary, instrumental purpose; they are designed to prevent what we believe would be a grave injustice. We pay a considerable price in security by forswearing preventive detention for those we have reason to think are likely to commit violent crimes in the future and by allowing those we believe have committed such crimes an opportunity to defend themselves with the aid of skilled counsel and be judged by officials who have not prejudged their guilt. It makes no sense to suppose that we pay that price for any reason except to prevent a grave injustice.

Those who defend the administration might argue, somewhat differently, that nationality makes a difference, that our ordinary rules of criminal process reflect our convictions only about what we owe our own fellow citizens and that we might in perfect good faith suppose that respecting the dignity of foreigners requires less by way of constraints on our police and military power. Justice Robert Jackson, a very distinguished Supreme Court justice who was a prosecutor at the Nuremberg trials of Nazis after World War II, once said that it would be silly to think that enemy nationals were entitled to the same rights under the American Constitution as are American citizens. But the idea of human rights would lose its meaning if a nation owed nothing to foreigners. We need a theory of citizenship that sets out and justifies a distinction between what a nation may do or refrain from doing for or to its own members and what it must do for or not do to anyone. I cannot construct such a theory now, but I can describe its rudiments.

Citizens must of course have unique privileges of participation in government: voting and holding office. Otherwise there would be no point to the distinction between citizens and aliens. Citizens may also have special rights to the benefits of residence: rights to enter the country when abroad, for example, which aliens, who may be refused a visa, do not have. Government has special responsibilities of care and concern for citizens and other residents, responsibilities that I will explore in chapter 4. A nation’s economic policy may be designed primarily to favor its own residents, and it may distribute welfare and other benefits to them that it does not distribute to people living in other countries. In all this, a nation may—and to some degree must—discriminate in favor of its own citizens and therefore against those not its own. But the deliberate infliction of injury is different, and government has no right or authority deliberately to injure foreigners for reasons or in circumstances in which it would not be permitted to injure its own citizens. This is emphatically true when the injury is grave. The domain of human rights has no place for passports.

Finally those who wish to defend the Bush administration may concede that its detention policies do violate the human rights of our prisoners but may nevertheless insist that we must “balance” the human rights of others against our own right to security from terror, so that we may properly ignore the rights of foreigners when the danger foreigners pose is sufficiently great. To be sure, it is often said that no rights can be absolute, that there are always circumstances in which government is justified in compromising or ignoring them. The great charters of human rights, including the European Convention on Human Rights, recognize this fact by burdening many of the rights that they list with important qualifications; the European Convention, for example, identifies free speech as a basic human right but then adds that governments are entitled to abridge that right when this is necessary to protect public order or morals. These qualifications were the result of political compromises that served to reassure countries hesitating to embrace the convention. But they do seem to suggest that human rights are not absolute and in that way to challenge my claims that human rights are powerful trumps over otherwise legitimate government aims.

There is an important ambiguity in the claim that human rights are not absolute, however. Sometimes it means that the description of a right in some document or in a common phrase is only an abstraction and must be refined before we know exactly what it means in concrete circumstances. We say that freedom of speech is a human right, but no one thinks that anyone’s human rights are violated by reasonable restrictions placed on the time and place of demonstrations and parades. We say that free speech is a right, but we owe ourselves a more precise accounting of what that right is; we might decide, for example, that it is the right not to be censored in the expression of political ideas on the ground that such ideas are in themselves wrong or dangerous, which explains why restrictions on the timing of parades are acceptable. That is, once we have a careful account of exactly what the human right in question really is, we no longer find it embarrassing to claim that right as absolute, to say that it brooks no violation.

Sometimes, however, the claim that even human rights are not absolute means something more dramatic and more pertinent: that in a sufficiently grave emergency, a government is justified in violating even the most basic and fundamental human rights even after these have been precisely stated. There is a stock example whose familiarity may have deadened its force. Suppose we have captured a terrorist who we know has planted a nuclear bomb timed to explode in two hours somewhere in Manhattan. It would be absurd, people say, not to torture him if we thought torture would force him to tell us where the bomb is in time to defuse it. Let us now accept, if only for the sake of this discussion, that it is morally permissible to violate human rights in a sufficiently grave emergency like this one. Then our question becomes: how grave must the emergency be?

Remember our premises. In chapter 1 I said that we damage ourselves, not just our victim, when we ignore his humanity, because in denigrating his intrinsic value we denigrate our own. We compromise our dignity and our self-respect. So we must put the hurdle of emergency very high indeed. We must take care not to define “emergency” as simply “great danger” or to suppose that any act that improves our own security, no matter how marginally, is for that reason justified. We must hold to a very different virtue: the old-fashioned virtue of courage. Sacrificing self-respect in the face of danger is a particularly shameful form of cowardice. We show courage in our domestic criminal law and practice: we increase the statistical risk that each of us will suffer from violent crime when we forbid preventive detention and insist on fair trials for everyone accused of crime. We must show parallel courage when the danger comes from abroad because our dignity is at stake in the same way.

Now notice the crucial dimensions of the stock example about the ticking nuclear bomb hidden in Manhattan. The danger is both horrific and certain; we know that our victim is responsible for that danger, and we assume that if we torture him and he yields, we can remove the danger. None of that is true about our policy of imprisonment without charge or trial in Guantánamo and our other bases around the world. We are in danger of another devastating attack, to be sure. But there is no reason yet to think that the danger approaches certainty or that our violations of human rights are well calculated to end or even significantly to reduce that danger. We gathered our prisoners indiscriminately. We erred on the side of inclusion; anyone we thought might be dangerous or might have useful information was swept up. We have already released, under diplomatic and judicial pressure, several of those we held in Guantánamo for many months. In each case, we stated that we are now satisfied that it is not necessary to hold the prisoners. Of course the public does not know what information the interrogation has so far secured. But the criticism of our detention policies has been so intense, at home as well as in other countries, that I suspect the government would have made more precise claims about the value of that information if it could have done so.

We are in great danger of falling into the trap I just warned against: thinking that anything that improves America’s security, however marginally or speculatively, is wise policy. That makes a terrified prudence the only virtue we recognize; it sacrifices courage and dignity to a mean and cowardly prejudice that our own security is the only thing that matters. We do not make that mistake in our own lives or our own domestic law, and it is not plain that the danger from terrorism is greater, all in all, than the dangers from drugs, serial killers, and other crimes. But the threat to our dignity is certainly greater now, and we must stand together to defeat that greater danger. The metaphor of balancing rights against security is, as I have said, very misleading. A different metaphor would be much more appropriate: we must balance our security against our honor. Are we now so frightened that honor means nothing?

===============================================================================

➀ For a statement of the case against the president’s claim, see the letter to members of Congress on National Security Agency spying from fourteen former officials and constitutional scholars, The New York Review of Books, February 9, 2006.

➁ See my article “What the Court Really Said,” The New York Review of Books, August 12, 2004.

➂ Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 415 F.3d 33 (2005).

➃ That is my own view. See Sovereign Virtue, chapters 11 and 12.

➄ See my book Justice for Hedgehogs (Harvard University Press, forthcoming).

===============================================================================

constitutional rights: prevent government from enacting laws or adopting policies that would otherwise seem attractive
- constitutional rights ⊂ legal rights

human rights: the right to be treated with a certain attitude, an attitude that expresses the understanding that each person is a human being whose dignity matters
- human rights ⊂ political rights
- baseline human rights
- forbids any government to act toward anyone in a way that contradicts its own understanding of those values

legal rights: rights protected by laws

moral rights: 

political rights: rights not against other people as individuals but against governments; a trump over the kind of trade-off argument that normally justifies political action
- political rights ⊂ moral rights
