Chapter 3 Religion and Dignity

Politics and Religion

America’s religiosity is not new; America has been a religious country since its beginning. A great many more Americans than Europeans believe in an afterlife, the Virgin birth, and the biblical account of the creation, both of the universe and of human beings. Islamic nations are also very religious, of course, and our declared war on terror often seems an anachronistic religious war. Indeed, Bush once called it a crusade. Historians debate why religion has been so important here; many now think that religion has prospered, paradoxically, because America has no official or established religion as several other democracies have. An established church sucks in fringe sects and tends toward ecumenism rather than fundamentalism; in the absence of an official church, fundamentalist sects thrive, and such sects are the ones most likely to have political agendas.

What is different now—and has frightened many people not just in America but around the world—is the political militancy, aggressiveness, and apparent success of fundamentalist religion. Religion played a deplorable role in American politics in the past, but after John Kennedy’s election in 1960—no Catholic had been elected president before him—the partisan use of religion seemed taboo. The inhibition began to evaporate in the Reagan years, however, and now it seems to be gone. Roman Catholic and evangelical priests openly called for John Kerry’s defeat, and a group of bishops said that any Catholic voting for him should be excommunicated. Bush’s campaign was full of references to God, and his second inaugural address amazed the world with its explicit religiosity.

The evangelical community claimed credit for Bush’s victory and called on him to repay its efforts. The Reverend Bob Jones III, president of Bob Jones University, is an extreme figure, but his triumphal tone was not untypical. He wrote Bush, “In your reelection, God has graciously granted America—though she doesn’t deserve it—a reprieve from the agenda of paganism. You have been given a mandate. . . . Put your agenda on the front burner and let it boil. You owe the liberals nothing. They despise you because they despise your Christ.”➀

It is unclear that the reverend was right in his claim that the election gave Bush a mandate for born-again Christian government; it is doubtful how many people voted for Bush primarily on religious grounds. A much-quoted exit poll suggested that the most important issue for many Bush voters was what the poll labeled “moral values,” and many commentators assumed this meant religious values. But “moral values” is an exceptionally opaque description, and other commentators think Bush won narrowly mainly because people thought he was tougher on terrorists. We do not know yet, and may never know. Religion did play at least an important role in the election, however, and aspiring politicians—Democratic as well as Republican—are plainly tempted to make much more explicit use of religious appeal and rhetoric than would be tolerated in other nations of similar democratic and economic maturity.➁

Parents and school boards across the country are pressing teachers to make their students aware of alternatives to the Darwinian theory of evolution, such as the so-called intelligent design theory, which a federal judge appointed by President Bush declared only a disguised form of Christian religious instruction. When Florida judges ruled that life support could be terminated for Terri Schiavo, a young woman who had been in a persistent vegetative state for many months, politicians declared that the judges were defying God’s will. Congress tried to intervene, and Tom DeLay, then the Republican House majority leader, who has since been indicted for various crimes, produced the stunningly insensitive claim that God had given her misery to the country “to help elevate the visibility of what is going on in America.”➂ Not everyone who is religious has joined this rush to political religiosity. John Danforth is a Christian minister who was a Republican senator from Missouri for eighteen years and for a time Bush’s ambassador to the United Nations. The Republican party, he said recently, “has gone so far in adopting a sectarian agenda that it has become the political extension of a religious movement.” “As a senator,” he continued, “I worried every day about the size of the federal deficit. I did not spend a single minute worrying about the effect of gays on the institution of marriage. Today it seems to be the other way around.”➃ But very few active politicians have spoken out against the phenomenon Danforth deplored.

Abortion made the difference in turning evangelicalism, which has long been socially powerful in large parts of America, into a more potent political force. The Supreme Court’s decision in Roe v. Wade in 1973 gave the religious Right an issue its members took to be of mortal importance, an issue that could organize a hitherto disparate minority into a powerful political movement. Abortion swept other issues in its wake: stem-cell research is on its own a much less potent issue, but the abortion argument had so hardened ideological positions that the so-called pro-life movement had to condemn any use of fetal tissue even in ways that promised to save lives on a grand scale. In 2004 these fiercely galvanizing issues were joined by gay marriage. The spectacle of marriage between people of the same sex, which the Massachusetts Supreme Court said the state was unable to prevent, is viscerally revolting to millions of people; it is particularly shocking to those who believe they have religious sanction for their revulsion.

These two issues, abortion and gay marriage, have been the most dramatic magnets drawing evangelicalism into politics. But they have spawned a much broader spectrum of causes, and religious conservatives now seem to aim at nothing short of a general absorption of Christianity into America’s public life. Once again, however, there has been no effort to construct a genuine argument about these developments. The pronouncements of the religious Right make no attempt to appeal to those who do not share the faith; they are unabashedly theological. The liberal side of the argument has been equally apocalyptic. Garry Wills published an article in the New York Times two days after the 2004 presidential election titled “The Day the Enlightenment Went Out,” calling Bush’s fundamentalist campaign a “jihad.”➄

Two Models

The clash of opinion that divides us on this issue is not about the truth of religion or about any tenet of faith. Many of those who are appalled by the program and tactics of the religious Right are themselves, like Danforth, devout. The clash is over the role that religion should play in politics, religion, and public life. How can we construct a genuine argument rather than just a brute confrontation about that?

We might try to do this issue by issue. Should abortion and stem-cell research be banned? Should gay marriage be recognized? Is it acceptable for our political leaders to appeal to a god and to that god’s will to justify their policies when Americans disagree about whether there is a god, and if so, what his, her, or its will is? Should prayer be either required or permitted in public schools? Should our pledge of allegiance refer to “one nation under God”? Should government issue education vouchers that parents can use to send their children to private instead of public schools when we know that these will be used primarily to support parochial schools? Should cities and towns be allowed to exhibit religious symbols like Christmas trees and menorahs on public property? Should a judge be allowed to place a tablet containing the Ten Commandments in his courtroom? Should Darwin and the big bang theory of cosmology be taught in our public schools? If so, should teachers be instructed to say that some reputable scientists reject these theories and believe that there is good scientific evidence that an intelligent author designed the universe and human beings? Should there be exemptions from general obligations or regulations for those whose religion requires or forbids a legally forbidden or required act? Can an atheist who hates war be a conscientious objector? Should Indian tribes who use peyote in their rites be exempt from laws banning peyote because it is a hallucinogenic drug? Should doctors be legally allowed to remove the life support of someone in a persistent vegetative state? Should they be legally allowed to help someone who is terminally ill and in great discomfort to kill himself? This is only a partial list of the issues we now debate about religion and government, and it will soon be out of date. We do not know what tomorrow’s cutting-edge issue about church and state will be.

We might discuss each of these issues in turn and try to anticipate other issues. In fact, I shall discuss some of them. But it will be more illuminating first to distinguish two polar attitudes that define the general problem, two models that we might adopt as ideal types to follow in confronting more concrete issues one by one. Americans agree on one crucially important principle: our government must be tolerant of all peaceful religious faiths and also of people of no faith. But from what base should our tolerance spring? Should we be a religious nation, collectively committed to the values of faith and worship, but with tolerance for religious minorities including nonbelievers? Or should we be a nation committed to thoroughly secular government but with tolerance and accommodation for people of religious faith? A religious nation that tolerates nonbelief? Or a secular nation that tolerates religion? In practice, a nation might well compromise between these two models, drawing some institutions and rules from each. Indeed American practice reflects such a mixture of the two models now. But the two models reflect contrary principles of political morality, and though we may be forced by practical politics to construct some compromise between them, any serious argument about the place of religion in government and public life must in the end be a debate about these competing ideals.

Israel has chosen to be a tolerant religious nation. It has an official religion—Judaism—though in principle it offers religious freedom to all faiths. France, with its complex background of priests and Jacobins, has firmly chosen the second model: it is a tolerant secular nation. Jacques Chirac, its president, attended Pope John Paul II’s funeral and flew French flags at half-mast, but he was sharply criticized in France for doing so. Britain is a more complex case, but it leans strongly to the second model as well, at least in practice. Its established church owes more to its love of tradition and ceremony, I think, than to any genuine shared national religious commitment, and it would be astounding—and politically fatal—for a prime minister to claim religious authority for state policy. Liberal Americans thought that their country had also chosen to be a tolerant secular state a few decades ago when our civics teachers proudly quoted Jefferson’s maxim about the wall between church and state and the Supreme Court took prayer out of the schools. But recent political success has emboldened the religious Right to try to turn America into a tolerant religious state instead.

We must be clear about what is at stake in that choice, and it will be helpful, at least initially, to use a distinction beloved of American constitutional scholars. Our First Amendment forbids our government to establish religion, and it then requires that that government guarantee the free exercise “thereof.” Scholars treat these as independent and, indeed, sometimes antagonistic requirements. Establishment refers to state endorsement or sponsorship of religion, and free exercise to individual freedom of religious practice. We can contrast the two models on each of these two dimensions.

The Establishment of Religion

A tolerant religious vision interprets the requirement that government must not establish religion to mean that it must not establish any one of the discrete faiths to which many of its citizens belong as the official state religion. It must not embrace Catholicism, Judaism, or the Baptist sect as the nation’s faith. But a tolerant religious state does openly acknowledge and support, as official state policy, religion as such; it declares religion to be an important positive force in making people and society better. It celebrates a generalized monotheism. A tolerant religious society therefore has no embarrassment about reference to a single god in its official pledge of allegiance; on the contrary, it would regard omitting such a reference as unpatriotic. Nor is it embarrassed by direct appeals to that god’s will as justifying policy, as when Bush said in his second inaugural address that in protecting liberty abroad he was serving the “author” of liberty. (He didn’t, I think, mean John Stuart Mill.) A tolerant religious society will accept only one reason for curtailing its rhetorical and financial support for religion—protecting the freedom of dissenters and nonbelievers. It will not prohibit or penalize the practice of any faith or the practice of none. But it will not shrink from declaring, as an official public conviction of the nation, that nonbelievers are deeply mistaken.

In a tolerant secular society the state must also be permissive about religion; it must not make the peaceful practice of even fundamentalist religion illegal. It is no more officially committed to atheism than it is to religion; it is collectively neutral on the subject of whether there is a god or gods or which religion is best, if any is. It would not tolerate any religious—or antireligious— reference or insinuation in its official ceremonies and statements of policy. On the contrary, it would take care to insulate its patriotic oaths, allegiances, and celebrations from any religious or antireligious dimension. It would not outlaw Christmas trees or menorahs, of course, but it would not install or permit them on public property. It would not penalize people of faith any more than it would atheists; it would not discriminate against either group in the provision of public services. But it would be wary of state programs that particularly benefited religious organizations, like providing general education vouchers that parents could then use to pay the fees of parochial schools. It would follow something like the rule that constitutional lawyers call the Lemon test because the Supreme Court announced it in a case of that name. This test forbids any state program that is either intended to or that does operate to the particular advantage of a religious organization. Justice Sandra Day O’Connor elaborated the second part of that test in this way “[T]he effect prong of the Lemon test is properly interpreted not to require invalidation of a government practice merely because it in fact causes, even as a primary effect, advancement or inhibition of religion. . . . What is crucial is that the government practice not have the effect of communicating a message of government endorsement or disapproval of religion.”➅

We may sharpen the contrast between the two models by focusing on the seminally divisive issue of public-school prayer. In a tolerant religious community, there can be no objection in principle to teachers’ leading schoolchildren in prayer. Such prayers must of course be designed to be as ecumenical as possible; the Lord’s Prayer, which I recited every day in school, would serve. However, a tolerant religious state must take care not to coerce children into reciting even so ecumenical a prayer as that, because it must leave them free to reject religion altogether. Perhaps simply allowing children who so choose to remain seated and silent would protect them from coercion. But perhaps not; it might be that children would be reluctant to identify themselves as outsiders in that way and would be pressured into reciting prayers in which they did not believe. Whether prayers would in the end be permitted in public schools in a tolerant religious society would depend on how that empirical psychological issue is resolved.➆

In a tolerant secular society, however, that empirical question would be irrelevant. It would be seen as wrong in principle to make any state institution such as a public school the venue of any exercise of any religion. Of course, a tolerant secular state would permit teaching about religion in public schools; no liberal education would be satisfactory without instruction in the doctrines of and differences between the main religious traditions, the history of religious divisions, and contemporary controversies about what role religion should play in public life. But a tolerant secular society would not allow its institutions to be used for practicing, as distinct from studying, religion.

The Free Exercise of Religion

Since each of our two model communities is tolerant of all peaceful religious practice, including no religious practice, we might think that they agree about the scope of religious freedom. But in fact they disagree deeply about what that freedom includes or at least presupposes. Neither model would impose any ban on the peaceful practice of any religion. But recognizing a right to religious freedom requires settling on at least a rough account of the origin and basis of that right, and the two communities must disagree about that. People who support a tolerant religious society might be tempted to declare the right of religious freedom to be sui generis, a special right reflecting the special importance of religion. They might therefore be tempted to a very narrow view of that right: that it encompasses only the freedom to worship a supernatural being under one description rather than another, or in one church dedicated to such worship rather than another, and also the freedom to reject altogether the existence or importance of any such creature. The right of religious freedom so understood would not presuppose any more general right from which it is drawn. It would not presuppose a general right to decide matters of fundamental ethical importance for oneself: the right to submit to an abortion, for example, or to practice homosexuality free from any particular penalty, to engage in stem-cell research, or to end one’s own life when terminally ill and in pain. Indeed, a tolerant religious society might prohibit or penalize all such practices on explicitly religious grounds: it might condemn homosexuality as against God’s will as recognized in all major monotheistic religious traditions, for example. These prohibitions would not violate the free exercise of religion even if they were justified in that religious way because the practices in question are not, for a tolerant religious society, in any sense religious practices.

A tolerant secular society cannot accept such a narrow account of the ground of freedom of religion, however. Although a tolerant religious society can find a special justification for that right in the special value of religion, a tolerant secular society cannot because it does not, as a community, attach any special value to religion as a phenomenon. It knows that many of its members do attach great importance to their freedom to choose their own religious commitments and life, and it is of course anxious to respect that conviction. But it also knows that other members attach comparable importance to making other choices about how to live—about sexuality or procreation, for instance—that reflect their own different convictions about what lives would be good for them. So any right to freedom of choice that gave special protection to religious people or religious practices would be regarded in such a society as discrimination in their favor because it would leave other people open to constraints on their freedom in the exercise of choices that, for them, reflect values of the same ethical character and function as the religious values of religious people. A tolerant secular community must therefore find its justification for religious freedom in a more basic principle of liberty that generates a more generous conception of the spheres of value in which people must be left free to choose for themselves. It must treat freedom of religion, that is, as one case of a more general right not simply of religious but of ethical freedom.

In chapter 1, in trying to explicate the second principle of human dignity, I offered this rough account of the distinction between ethical and other values: ethical values are those that define why human life has distinct and intrinsic value and how that value is best realized in a particular life. Orthodox religious convictions are plainly ethical on that account, and a tolerant secular society that adopted a right of ethical freedom would of course guarantee freedom of orthodox religious exercise. But it would not limit the scope of the ethical to orthodox religion; it could have no reason for embracing freedom of orthodox worship without also embracing freedom of choice in all ethical matters and therefore freedom of choice with respect to the ethical values that are plainly implicated in decisions about sexual conduct, marriage, and procreation.

Where Do We Stand Now?

Which model does the American Constitution provide? Religious conservatives answer that question by reciting the following history. America was founded as a tolerant religious society and continued to be one until after the Second World War, when unelected judges decided, against the plain wishes of most Americans, to transform it into a tolerant secular state. So the religious political movement now under way, which aims to wipe away what the unelected judges did, is not revolutionary but rather designed to restore religion to its historic place in American society and government. That is not an unreasonable history. In 1931 the Supreme Court could declare, “We are a Christian people,”➇ and as late as 1952 Justice William O. Douglas, generally counted among the most liberal justices in the Court’s history, announced, “We are a religious people whose institutions presuppose a Supreme Being.”➈ The decisions that religious conservatives count as hostile to religion came later: in 1962, for instance, when the Court outlawed public-school prayer on the ground—distinctive to the tolerant secular model—that the state has no legitimate business promoting religion.➉

The tolerant religious view has certainly had strong support on the Supreme Court, particularly recently. Justice Anthony Kennedy spoke for that view in dissenting from a Supreme Court decision that endorsed and applied the Lemon test. He said, “Rather than requiring government to avoid any action that acknowledges or aids religion, the [Constitution] permits government some latitude in recognizing and accommodating the central role religion plays in our society.”⑪ He specifically rejected the idea that government must do nothing that would make nonreligious people feel like outsiders. He noted that our pledge of allegiance includes a reference to God, and he said that it “borders on sophistry” to suggest that an atheist would not feel “less a member of the political community every time his fellow Americans” recited that phrase. The Constitution, he said, does not require anything more than that government not actually coerce citizens into any religious declaration or observance and that it not actually establish a state religion. That is an extreme statement of the tolerant religious model, but it might accurately state the position of a majority of the justices now serving.

In many other ways that will strike you as more trivial, we seem closer to a tolerant religious model than a tolerant secular one. Our currency declares our collective trust in God, our great institutions of government begin their proceedings with a prayer, and few commentators would expect the Supreme Court to declare the pledge of allegiance’s reference to God unconstitutional if it is ever required to decide that issue. It is widely argued that these practices are only ceremonial, only ritual mumblings, like the telephone operator wishing you a nice day. But the Supreme Court would, I think, arouse national fury if it failed finally to sustain the pledge in its present form, and this testifies not to the banality and unimportance of official invocations of God but to their symbolic importance. They reassure religious citizens that they do not live in a fundamentally secular society, a society in which even casual official references to God would be forbidden.

Religion and Narrow Political Liberalism

So liberals cannot claim with any confidence that the secular model is America’s historical model. But we must try to frame a debate of principle, not of history. For some time many liberal academic philosophers in America have tried to insulate their discussion of political policy from more general issues of ethical and moral philosophy and in particular from issues of theology. That strategy is based on an attractive hope: that reasonable people in political community will wish to live together on terms of mutual respect and accommodation and will therefore accept the constraints of what the very influential philosopher John Rawls called public reason.⑫ They will accept that they must justify collective political decisions to one another in terms that each can understand and whose force each can appreciate given his own comprehensive religious, moral, and ethical beliefs. That constraint would rule out appeals to even an ecumenical religious faith in a community some of whose members reject all religion. It would command a tolerant secular state. So we might try to frame our debate around the question whether we should all accept that constraint of public reason.

Rawls himself described the weakness of his proposal, however. “How is it possible . . . for those of faith . . . to endorse a constitutional regime even when their comprehensive doctrines may not prosper under it, and indeed may decline?”⑬ We must look at the matter from the standpoint of such people. Many religious conservatives think that a god is responsible for America’s exceptional success and good fortune and that it is both base and dangerous to deny that god public tribute for that grace. Newt Gingrich declared, “We must reestablish that our rights come from our Creator, and that an America that has driven God out of the public arena is an America on the way to decay and defeat.”⑭ Americans of that opinion cannot separate these religious convictions from their political principles. Their religious convictions are political principles. They do not accept private observance as a substitute for public religious endorsement; they want to celebrate their god not just as private worshipers but as citizens. They want to pour their faith into their patriotism so that the two commitments are one. They see no appeal in a principle that tells them to set that transcendent ambition aside in deference to people who do not share their religious faith. They think that such people are in profound error and that the error is willful. They believe not that religion is inaccessible to atheists or that the god they recognize has denied such people his grace, but rather that atheists have stubbornly refused to open their hearts to the truth. Why should they abandon the profound ambitions of their faith simply to satisfy those who persist in that stubbornness?

Moreover, it is hardly plain that it would be desirable for people of religion to keep their convictions divorced from their politics even if that were possible for them. Martin Luther King Jr. was a man of faith, and he invoked his religion to condemn prejudice with great effect; Catholic priests speaking as priests have been vanguard fighters for social justice in Latin America and elsewhere. In any case, however, liberals will not succeed if they ask people of faith to set aside their religious convictions when they take up the role of citizens. That role demands sincerity and authenticity, which is impossible for such people unless they keep their religion very much in mind. The schism over religion in America shows the limitations of Rawls’s project of political liberalism, his strategy of insulating political convictions from deeper moral, ethical, and religious conviction.

Our strategy must be different. We must not try to exclude people’s most profound convictions from political debate. On the contrary, we must try to achieve a genuine debate within civil society about those profound convictions. Liberals must try to show religious conservatives that their ambition to fuse religion and politics in the way they now propose is an error because it contradicts very basic principles that are also part of their faith. Conservatives must try to show liberals that they are wrong in that judgment. I said in chapter 1 that we almost all accept the second principle of human dignity, the principle that requires each of us to take personal responsibility for his ethical convictions, including his religious convictions. People in the religious traditions that flourish in America now accept this principle, indeed insist upon it, as among the articles of their faith. That principle, remember, does not purport to bar the influence of culture or family tradition on people’s religious choice. That would be pointless. Nor does it bar achieving conviction through faith, revelation, or the direct perception of divinity unmediated by argument. It bars only subordinating ourselves to other people who aim to make and enforce deliberate choices of religious faith for us.

Religious as well as secular Americans would acknowledge that responsibility to reject subordination; faith for them must be a matter of conviction from within, not compulsion from without. So we can frame an argument around this question: can people who understand and accept that responsibility consistently hope for a religious state, even a tolerant religious state? That is a question about the best interpretation of a principle we share as common ground. In the next several pages I shall argue for one answer to that question: that the principle of personal responsibility requires a tolerant secular state and rules out a tolerant religious state. I do not suppose that my argument will persuade many who initially disagree with that claim. But I do hope that it will provoke them to explain why they believe my argument fails and then to construct a different understanding of that principle, one that supports a different conclusion from mine.

Why Religious Freedom?

If the question whether the United States should be a tolerant religious or a tolerant secular state were to be decided by asking whether a majority of Americans are religious, the verdict would go to the former. The great majority of Americans embrace some form of monotheistic religious faith; the great bulk of them are Christians. But I am now assuming that the great bulk of Americans also accept the principle of personal responsibility I described. People who self-consciously accept that principle insist on the freedom they need to exercise that responsibility; they insist on legal rights to protect that freedom. The right of religious freedom that both of our models recognize is such a right; it protects people’s responsibility to find value in their lives. But as I said, the models differ in how broadly they interpret the right of religious freedom and in their attitude toward state establishment of religion. Which of these interpretations better matches what the principle of personal responsibility requires in a community of mostly religious citizens?

We must talk about liberty, and I must first clarify my vocabulary. I shall use the word “liberty” to describe the set of rights that government should establish and enforce to protect people’s personal ethical responsibility properly understood. I shall use the word “freedom” in a more neutral way, so that any time the government prevents someone from acting as he might wish, it limits his freedom. Defined in that way, freedom is not a political value. There is nothing to regret when I am prevented from kidnapping your children—no wrong has been done to me, even one that might be deemed necessary or excusable. But liberty defined as I defined it is of course a political value; it identifies those areas of freedom that government does do wrong to limit or invade. That is the value we must now explore.

The two models we are contrasting disagree in the scope and range of the religious freedom each offers. The tolerant religious model supposes a narrow conception of religious freedom that does not include, for instance, a right to choose abortion or to marry someone of the same sex. The tolerant secular model insists on a broader conception that does include the right to make such choices. These are competing theories of liberty. Which theory is more appropriate for a nation in which a large majority believes in a god?

I said earlier that supporters of the tolerant religious model might defend their narrow conception of religious freedom by insisting that religion is special and therefore needs a distinct kind of protection that does not apply to other activities. In fact, however, on a more careful look, that defense is not available to them because they extend religious freedom to atheists as well as believers, and they need a more general theory of liberty to defend that extension. The statesmen who founded the American nation in the eighteenth century had very practical reasons for protecting religious dissent. That story is familiar: the terrible religious wars in Europe in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries demonstrated the tragic consequences of imposed religious orthodoxy, and religious freedom was the best and perhaps only means to stop civil war and slaughter. Our founders were particularly conscious of religion’s bloody history: religious dissent was not only instrumental in settling several American colonies but a source of division and even violence within them. But that explanation will not serve as a justification for tolerating atheism or even marginal religions now. Political stability is much greater in contemporary America and in other mature democracies than it was in seventeenth-century Europe. We might provoke a horrific wave of terrorism if we outlawed Islam in America, but we would have little to fear in denying churches or assembly to Jehovah’s Witnesses or the disciples of the Reverend Moon, and even less to fear if we required the children of atheists to stand and recite the Lord’s Prayer in school.

In any case, however, people drawn to the tolerant religious model think that religious freedom for everyone, including atheists, is a matter of principle, not simply wise policy. Some of them think that that freedom is itself a matter of theological requirement; John Locke, for example, held that a forced conversion was of no use to God, and the Virginia Bill for Religious Liberty, the precursor of the religion clauses of the First Amendment, stated that all attempts to coerce religion “are a departure from the plan of the Holy author of our religion.” But even if most religious Americans hold that view, this would not explain why they think it wrong for the government to establish churches and give them financial support as other nations do. It might be said, finally, that religion is special and needs special protection for a different reason: for many people religious observance is a matter of transcendent importance touching, as they believe it does, their eternal salvation or damnation so that any constraint on religious practice would do particularly grave damage to them. But of course atheists believe no such thing.

So once we consider the details of the tolerant religious view as this is now defended in America, we see that it must rely on a more general theory of liberty to explain why it is as tolerant as it is. It cannot simply appeal to the importance or value of religion to defend that level of tolerance. This is an important conclusion because it means that the argument between the two models must be conducted on a more general philosophical plane. If each of the two approaches must appeal to some more general conception of liberty, we may be able to clarify the argument between them by considering the philosophical question of what liberty really is.

The Structure of Liberty

As I said, liberty is not just freedom. No one has a right to live precisely as he wishes; no one has a right to a life dedicated to violence, theft, cruelty, or murder. Government limits people’s freedom not only to protect the safety and freedom of other people but in many other ways as well. Taxes also limit my power to live as I wish; I can put more of what I believe to be valuable into my life if the government allows me to fill my purse and keep it filled. But we do not, at least most of us, count taxation as a constraint on liberty. Sometimes paying taxes does seem an insult to self-respect; it seemed that way to Henry David Thoreau, for example, because he objected strongly to how his taxes would be used. But most of us, most of the time, do not regard paying taxes as an indignity or an insult to our power to choose our own values. How shall we clarify the basic principle of personal responsibility and the liberty it requires so as to recognize these important limits to the right to live according to one’s preferred values?

I propose this initial formulation: liberty is the right to do what you want with the resources that are rightfully yours.⑮ I must decide what is rightfully mine before I can claim a right to shape my own life in any particular way. I cannot claim a right to live like Attila the Hun on a bad day, because I cannot think that your life and property are at my disposal. If we accept this account of liberty, then we must also accept that liberty is not damaged when government restricts freedom if it has a plausible distributive reason for doing so. A distributive justification appeals to some theory about the fair allocation of the resources and opportunities that are available to the community as a whole. Laws prohibiting damage to person or property are distributive because they assume a theory of property and respect for property. That is a distributive matter. Tax laws are also distributive because they assume some theory about who should bear and in what proportion the costs of society, including the costs of remedying the injustice of an unregulated market economy. Of course a regulation cannot be justified as distributive if its putative distributive justification is unsound. Unfair taxation does compromise liberty, but fair taxation does not.

This conception of liberty supposes that people have a right to choose and live their values only within the space allowed by proper distributional regulations and constraints of these different kinds. That follows from the important constraint I mentioned in chapter 1: if we accept the two principles of human dignity, we must work out the implications of each in the light of the other. If I accept both that everyone’s life is of equal intrinsic value and that everyone has the same personal responsibility for his life as I do, then these assumptions must shape my definition of my own responsibility. I must define that responsibility so that it is compatible with a like responsibility among other people because their lives are of equal importance to mine. So I cannot regard proper distributional constraints, which allocate resources among these different lives, as compromising my personal responsibility for my own life. I must regard them as helping to define what my personal responsibility is.

But we must now distinguish distributive justifications for constraints on people’s freedom, which are in principle acceptable, from other kinds of justification that might be proposed. A personally judgmental justification appeals to or presupposes a theory about what kinds of lives are intrinsically good or bad for the people who lead those lives. Any justification for making sodomy illegal that cites the immorality or baseness of that sexual practice is personally judgmental. Personally judgmental justifications must in turn be distinguished from impersonally judgmental justifications that appeal to the intrinsic value of some impersonal object or state of affairs rather than to the intrinsic value of certain kinds of lives. If government limits the freedom of timber companies in order to protect great forests, it appeals to the impersonally judgmental justification that such forests are natural treasures.

The principle of personal responsibility distinguishes between these two kinds of judgmental justifications because it insists only that people have responsibility for their own ethical values, that is, their own convictions about why their life has intrinsic importance and what kind of life would best realize that value for them. It does not give them an immunity from laws that protect impersonal values like natural or artistic treasures. So government does not offend that principle when it adopts zoning schemes to protect the architectural or historic integrity of some part of a city, for example, or when it uses public funds collected in taxes to support museums. Of course not every impersonally judgmental justification is acceptable; no one’s freedom should be curtailed just to protect a worthless architectural style or an undistinguished clump of trees. Impersonally judgmental justifications must also respect proper distributional principles: government should choose methods for protecting resources that distribute the burden of the protection fairly. Preserving the architectural integrity of some neighborhood through conservation zoning, for instance, is normally legitimate only if it leaves opportunity for radical architectural expression somewhere else.

This distinction between personally and impersonally judgmental justifications for limiting freedom is crucial to the defense of liberty. We must distinguish between laws that violate dignity by usurping an individual’s responsibility for his own ethical values and those that exercise a community’s essential collective responsibility to identify and protect nonethical values. We may leave religious and other ethical values to individual judgment and conscience, but we can only protect our aesthetic environment together. However, this indispensable distinction is elusive in some cases. The Supreme Court has tried to draw it on several occasions. It had once to decide whether an atheist who believes that all war is wrong has the kind of “religious” conviction that entitles him to conscientious objector status. The Court ruled that this depends on whether the atheist’s conviction has “a place in the life of its possessor parallel to that filled by the orthodox belief in God of one who clearly qualifies for the exemption.”⑯ In the Court’s Casey decision, in which it reaffirmed its Roe v. Wade holding that states may not criminalize early abortion, three justices tried to capture the distinction between ethical and other values in a different way. “[A]t the heart of liberty,” they said, “is the right to define one’s own concept of existence, of meaning, of the universe, and of the mystery of human life.”⑰ They added that beliefs about such matters “define the attributes of personhood.” Decisions about abortion, they held, are decisions of that character, and freedom therefore requires that the final decision about abortion before viability must be left to a pregnant woman and her doctor. The Supreme Court relied on that language in a later case of great importance: Lawrence v. Texas, in which it held that laws purporting to make all homosexual sodomy a crime are also unconstitutional; it decided that sexual orientation and activity are also a matter of ethical value rather than some other form of value.⑱ In these various decisions and opinions, the justices tried to identify the convictions that define “personhood,” the convictions through which a person tries to identify the value and point of human life and the relationships, achievements, and experiences that would realize that value in his own life.

Orthodox religious convictions are plainly in that category, and so are people’s convictions about the role and direction of love, intimacy, and sexuality in their lives. These beliefs and commitments fix the meaning and tone of the most important associations people form; they are drawn from and feed back into their more general philosophical beliefs about the character and value of human life. But a logging executive’s conviction that ancient forests are of no particular interest or value—that (as an American vice president once put it) if you’ve seen one tree, you’ve seen them all—is not an ethical conviction. It is neither derived from nor formative of convictions about the importance of human life or of achievement in a human life. No doubt we can think of more troublesome cases in which it is less clear to which of these categories some belief or conviction belongs. The decisions of constitutional courts charged with enforcing the distinction between these categories are sometimes difficult. But the distinction is nevertheless crucial, and in the most important cases—about religion, family, and sex, for instance—it is not difficult to draw.

Liberty and Culture

We have now identified the main structural features of a conception of liberty that respects the principles of human dignity. Liberty is not infringed by constraints that can be justified on sound distributive or sound impersonally judgmental grounds. My liberty is not compromised when I am taxed to fund a new road to the hospital or when I am forbidden to build a postmodern house in a Georgian block. But it is compromised by coercive laws that can be justified only on personally judgmental grounds. We may allow that some personally judgmental constraints are permissible; these are the superficially paternalistic constraints of seat belts and pharmaceutical regulation. These do not, on a second look, offend the principle of personal responsibility because they are based on plausible assumptions about what the people’s values actually are and also because they are typically supported by important distributive justifications. But some laws can be justified only on deep paternalistic assumptions—that the majority knows better than some individuals where value in their lives is to be found and that it is entitled to force those individuals to find it there. These laws are offensive to liberty and must be condemned as affronts to people’s personal responsibility for their own lives.

Now these important conclusions may strike you as decisive in the choice between our two models of religion and politics, decisive for a tolerant secular state and against a tolerant religious state. But that assumption is premature because the important argument has just begun. The strongest and most popular case for a religious state in a nation most of whose members are religious is not paternalistic but cultural. That case rests on the assumption that a political majority has a right to create the culture it wants to live in and raise its children in not for the sake of the minority who might protest but for their own sakes—because a society openly committed to religious values is better for them. Compare, for a moment, the arguments that are now deemed the best arguments for the prohibition or regulation of pornography. Censorship of pornography was once defended on paternalistic grounds: pornography corrupts those who read it, and prohibition is therefore good for them. But now a different justification for censorship is much more popular: sexually explicit material should be prohibited in order to protect the culture in which all citizens must live. Parents will have an easier time teaching their children a proper appreciation of sex as intimacy constructed by love if those children are not constantly exposed to materials that offer a very different and less attractive picture. Moreover, children are not the only people threatened by a debasement of sex in the culture. Women in particular are insulted and their subordination reinforced by their depiction as sexual slaves or masochists in much of pornography. Indeed, everyone, men and women alike, may find their lives cheapened by the sordid commercial exploitation of life’s most intimate experiences. That is not a paternalistic argument. It cites instead the right of a majority to shape the culture that has powerful consequences for its own lives.

This is the crucial issue we must now face about religion. Who should have control, and in what way, over the moral, ethical, and aesthetic culture in which we must all live? This complex culture is shaped by many forces, but I now isolate two of these. It is shaped by discrete decisions of individual people about what to produce and what to buy and at what price, about what to read and say, about what to wear, what music to listen to, and what god, if any, to pray to. Our culture is in large part a vector of many millions of such decisions that people make, as individuals, one by one, every day. But our culture is also shaped by law, that is, by collective decisions taken by elected legislators as to how we must all behave. Interest-rate policy fixed by the Federal Reserve Board shapes our economic culture, zoning ordinances shape our aesthetic culture, and civil rights laws shape our moral culture. How shall we decide which aspects of culture should be influenced collectively in that way and which should be left to the organic process of individual decision?

Americans who feel entitled to a tolerant religious society assume that a majority of citizens has the right, acting through the normal political process, to shape the religious character of our shared culture by law. They accept that the majority must also respect the right of dissenters to their own religious observance or to none. But they insist that if the majority thinks that religious faith is good for a community, it can direct the power and prestige of the state to endorse that faith, deploy the finances and authority of compulsory public education to promote it, and shape the emotional charge of patriotic celebration to affirm it. That is the explicit claim of the religious Right now.

Newt Gingrich proclaims that 92 percent of Americans “believe in God” and quotes with pleasure the 1931 Supreme Court decision I mentioned that announced, “We are a Christian people.”⑲ The majority, in his view, has a right to the culture it prefers, and the courts that try to drive any god from public life cheat the majority of that right. President Bush has become enamored of the phrase “culture of life,” and that phrase was on the lips of many conservatives throughout the tragic long death of Terri Schiavo. The phrase is code for the culture that conservatives hope to create not through individual choice but through legal compulsion. The secular model insists, on the contrary, that our collective religious culture should be created not through the collective power of the state but organically, through the separate acts of conviction, commitment, and faith of people drawn to such acts. That is finally the most important contrast between the two models, the true contrast between the ideals of public faith and private conviction. Which view best matches our shared ideals of human dignity?

The second principle of dignity assigns each of us a responsibility to assess and choose ethical values for himself rather than to yield to the coercive choices of others. Our culture of course influences our choice of values; our personalities are in that way all partly constructed out of the millions of choices that others have made for themselves. Their choices largely determine the books we read, the images we see, and the expectations that shape what we instinctively do. The second principle does not forbid this inevitable influence; it forbids subordination, which is something very different. It forbids my accepting that other people have the right to dictate what I am to think about what makes a good life or to forbid me to act as I wish because they think my ethical values are wrong. It therefore forbids me to accept any manipulation of my culture that is both collective and deliberate—that deploys the collective power and treasure of the community as a whole and that aims to affect the ethical choices and values of its members. That is subordination. It makes no difference that the purpose of such manipulation is to benefit the manipulators. I must reject manipulation even if the values it is designed to protect or instill are my own values because my dignity is as much outraged by coercion intended to freeze my values as by coercion intended to change them.

Of course a majority may adopt coercive policies that are justified on distributive grounds of justice or impersonally judgmental grounds of conservation even when these policies are likely to affect how people conceive of successful lives. Redistributive taxation and civil rights acts, for example, may well transform the culture in ways that will affect citizens’ sense of how they can and should live. Such measures impact our ethical culture, perhaps strongly, but they can be justified entirely apart from any assumption that that impact will be ethically beneficial, that people will lead better as well as fairer lives in a culture so transformed. So I can accept coercive policies of that sort without any sense that I have abandoned to others my responsibility to decide for myself what ethical values my life should reflect. It is different when people in power use that power deliberately to shape an ethical culture more suited to their tastes. I cannot accept their right to do that without conceding that a majority has the power to shape my convictions according to its standards of how to live well.

It is worth noticing that Americans are unwilling to grant political majorities a parallel collective power over the fundamentals of our economic culture. Socialist societies do give people in power the authority to shape the economic environment for everyone by stipulating price and the allocation of resource and production. But we insist on a free market in goods and services; we insist, that is, that the economic culture be shaped by a vector of individual decisions reflecting individual values and wishes. Yes, distributive fairness requires that our free market be structured to protect against externalities of different kinds, and to protect people who for other reasons will not be treated fairly by pure market allocation. I discuss these required market structures and constraints in chapter 4. But an acceptable market regulation must take some form that does not deprive any group or person of an impact on supply and price that reflects its or his own wishes and values. Economic socialism is an insult to liberty as well as to efficiency, and that is a view most enthusiastically held by the conservatives who favor a religious model for noneconomic culture. They do not realize that liberty is even more perilously at stake in the religious than in the economic case.

So the judgment made by officials who decide that the state should express religious values in order to promote a culture of religion is just as personally judgmental and just as offensive to liberty as a paternalistic justification would be. It makes no difference that a large majority may hope for a religious culture. People’s personal responsibility for their own lives is as much frustrated by allowing a majority of citizens to impose their values on everyone through legislation as it would be by allowing some minority to do that.

Issues

Science and Religion

The conception of liberty we constructed, which forbids coercion justified on personally judgmental grounds, does indeed favor the tolerant secular over the tolerant religious model of government even in a community most of whose members are religious. That, in any case, is the burden of the argument I have now offered you. I hope that those who disagree will respond by offering reasons for thinking my argument wrong. They might, for example, reject the general account I gave of liberty and of the importance I placed on the distinction between personally judgmental reasons for influencing culture, on the one hand, and distributive and impersonally judgmental reasons, on the other. But any contrary argument they might produce must be grounded in a theory of liberty of comparable scope, and if they do accept the principle of personal responsibility, their theory of liberty must be drawn from and fit that principle. It would not do simply to think that because my argument justifies conclusions they dislike it must be wrong.

I will not try to anticipate such rival arguments. Instead I shall fill out my own argument by returning to some of the specific issues that I said divide the two models as they divide the two cultures, liberal and conservative, blue and red, into which the nation is now supposedly divided. The politically most consequential of these issues remains abortion. Many conservatives say that abortion is murder, and the fervor of their opposition—some conservatives have killed doctors who perform abortions—testifies to that belief. A political community must somehow decide collectively, through courts or legislatures, whether abortion is murder; if it is, then outlawing abortion is necessary on distributive rather than judgmental grounds and constitutes no offense to liberty. If abortion is not murder, however, then it can be said to be wrong only on personally judgmental grounds, which a society dedicated to liberty must avoid. Whether abortion is murder does not depend, in my view, on whether a fetus is a human being at some very early point after conception—of course it is—but on whether it has interests and so rights to protect those interests at that early stage.

I have argued, elsewhere, that it does not.⑳ No creature has interests who has not had a mental life that has generated those interests.㉑ It makes sense to say that people who are now dead or permanently unconscious still have interests. We mean that their lives will have been more successful if the interests they formed while alive and conscious flourish when they are unconscious or dead.㉒ My life will have gone better if, as I very much hope, my family prospers after my death, for instance. But creatures who have never felt pain or made plans or formed attachments of any kind have developed no interests to fulfill or frustrate. So I do not believe that early fetuses have rights or that abortion is murder, and I therefore believe the Supreme Court was right to hold that making early abortion a crime is inconsistent with respecting personal responsibility. But my argument is too complex to repeat now, so I simply refer those who are interested to my book on the subject and turn instead to a closely related issue that does not raise any question of murder.

This is the question of science. Nothing frightens liberals and moderates more, I think, than the vision of religious organizations and movements dictating what may be taught to children in public schools either through formal legislation or school board rulings or through informal intimidation of teachers. Many Americans are horrified by the prospect of a new dark age imposed by militant superstition; they fear a black, know-nothing night of ignorance in which America becomes an intellectually backward and stagnant theocracy. But someone must decide what children are taught about history and science. If the elected school board or the majority of parents in a particular jurisdiction sincerely believes that Darwin’s theory of evolution is radically wrong, why should they not have the power to prevent that error from being taught to their children, just as they have the power to prevent teachers from converting their classes to the Flat Earth Society? It is no answer that children must not be taught the biblical theory of creation because the Bible must be kept out of the classroom. The Bible also condemns murder, but that does not mean that children cannot be taught that murder is wrong.

But the cosmological and biological beliefs of the religious conservatives do not just coincide with their religious convictions; they would reject those cosmological and biological beliefs out of hand if these were not dictated by those religious convictions. Almost all religious conservatives accept that the methods of empirical science are in general well designed for the discovery of truth and that their children must be taught the reliability of those methods if they are to be prepared for their adult lives. They would not countenance requiring or permitting teachers to teach, even as an alternative theory, what science has established as unquestionably and beyond challenge false: that the sun orbits the Earth or that radioactivity is harmless, for example. The biblical account of the creation of the universe and of human beings is just as silly from the perspective of any scientific discipline. Some religious people find that for them faith trumps science in these and the other few remaining areas in which faith challenges science. They deny the truth of Darwinian theory in the self-conscious exercise of their personal responsibility to fix the role of faith in their lives. That is their right; it would be a terrible violation of liberty to try to coerce them out of that conviction. But if they are to respect the second principle of human dignity that we have been exploring, they must not try to impose that faith on others, including children who are coerced into public education.

In recent years a few religious scientists have claimed a refutation of the main tenets of Darwinian evolution that does not rely on biblical authority or the biblical young-Earth account of creation. This refutation purports only to show that an “intelligent design” rather than the unguided processes of nature and natural selection that Darwin postulated must be responsible for creating life and human beings. The thesis has quickly gained enormous attention and notoriety. Several states have considered requiring teachers to describe the intelligent design theory as an available alternative to standard evolutionary theory in public high school biology classes. A Pennsylvania school board adopted that requirement a few years ago, and though a federal judge then struck the proposal down as an unconstitutional imposition of Christian doctrine in public schools,㉓ other public bodies in other states are still pursuing similar programs. President Bush recently appeared to endorse these campaigns; he said, “I felt like both sides ought to be properly taught.”㉔ The Senate majority leader, Senator Frist, who is said to covet the Republican nomination for the presidency in 2008, agreed. He said that teaching intelligent design theory along with evolution, as competing scientific explanations of the creation of human life, is fair because it “doesn’t force any particular theory on anyone.”㉕

If there is any scientific evidence against evolution, then of course students should be taught what it is. But the intelligent design movement has discovered no scientific evidence at all. We must distinguish the following three claims: (1) Scientists have not yet shown to all their satisfaction how the Darwinian processes of random mutation and natural selection explain every feature of the development of plant and animal life on our planet; some features remain areas of speculation and controversy among them. (2) There is now good scientific evidence that these features cannot be explained within the general Darwinian structure; a successful explanation will therefore require abandoning that structure altogether. (3) This evidence also at least suggests that an intelligent designer created life and designed the processes of development that have produced human beings.

The first of these claims is both correct and unsurprising. The details of evolutionary theory, like the phenomena it tries to explain, are massively complex. Eminent biologists disagree in heated arguments about, for example, whether some features of developed life are best explained as accidents or as byproducts of no survival value in themselves. Evolutionary biologists face other challenges and disagree in how best to meet them.

The second of the three claims is false. It does not follow from the fact that evolutionary scientists have not yet found or agreed on a solution to some puzzle that their methods have been shown to be defective, any more than it follows from historical controversies or unproved mathematical conjectures that the methods of historians or mathematicians must be abandoned. Scientists have so far found no reason to doubt that evolutionary puzzles can be solved within the general apparatus of Darwinian theory; none of the rival solutions they offer calls that general apparatus into question. The proponents of intelligent design theory claim in their lectures, popular writing, and television appearances that the irreducible complexity of certain forms of life—no element of even certain primitive forms of life could be removed without making it impossible for that form of life to survive—proves that Darwin’s theory must be rejected root and branch. But their arguments are very bad, a judgment confirmed by their failure so far to expose these arguments to professionals by submitting articles to peer-reviewed journals.㉖ It is no explanation of this failure to suppose that the scientific establishment would reject even well-reasoned articles that challenged Darwin. On the contrary, a scientifically sound general attack on evolution would be very exciting news indeed; a Nobel Prize might be around the corner.

The third claim would be false even if the second claim were true. If the failure to find a natural physical or biological explanation of some physical or biological phenomenon were taken to be evidence of divine intervention, which could then be accepted as the phenomenon’s cause, science would disappear for at least two reasons. First, science depends on the possibility of verification or falsification, and there can be no evidence that a superhuman power that is unconstrained by natural laws either has or has not caused anything at all. Second, once divine intervention is accepted as a candidate for the explanation of any natural event, it must be acknowledged always to be available as an explanation of everything for which no conventional scientific explanation has yet been discovered. Doctors have established a strong correlation between cigarette smoking and lung cancer, but they do not yet know the mechanisms through which one causes the other. Why should we not then say that an explanation is nevertheless at hand: God punishes select cigarette smokers? Indeed, once divine intervention is accepted as a possible candidate for scientific explanation, it is available even as a rival to a fully adequate conventional explanation. Why should we prefer a physicist’s account of global warming, which suggests that the process will continue unless and until people reduce the level of their carbon pollution of the atmospheres, to the rival account that a god is warming the planet for his own unknown purposes and will cool it again when he wishes? Once we accept any miracle of creation, then we must accept that both divine and conventional scientific explanations fit any set of facts equally well. Very few socially conservative Americans would vote for a school board that allowed teachers to explain anything they wished by citing a miracle. The concept of intelligent design appeals to some of them because it purports to give scientific blessing to exactly and only the specific miracle on which they believe their religion rests: creation. But that discrimination cannot be sustained; once miracles are recognized as competitive with scientific explanations, the damage to reason cannot be limited or controlled.

I am not now denying the truth of any theological hypothesis; I am not denying that those many millions of people who believe that a god created the universe or life or human beings are right. But their belief, even if it is in some way warranted, does not provide a scientific explanation of those events. This distinction is not merely semantic; I am not quibbling about the meaning of “science.” If we are to protect dignity by protecting people’s responsibility for their own personal values, then we must build our compulsory education and our collective endorsements of truth around the distinction between faith and reason. We need a defensible conception of science not only for the intensely practical reason that we must prepare our children and youth to advance knowledge and to compete in the world’s economy, but also to protect the personal responsibility of our citizens for their religious faith. We need an account of science, in our public philosophy of government, that does not make its authority depend on commitment to any set of religious or ethical values. So Senator Frist made a serious mistake when he said that describing intelligent design only as a scientific alternative to evolution doesn’t “force any theory on anyone.” In fact, it damages young students, practically and politically, by using the state’s authority to force on them a false and disabling view of what science is.

When President Bush said that intelligent design should be taught in the schools, his science adviser, John Marburger, said that “Darwinian theory is a cornerstone of modern biology,” and that Bush meant only that “students should be taught that some people have suggested that Intelligent Design is a viable alternative theory.”㉗ If so, we should welcome Bush’s suggestion. In chapter 5 I describe a contemporary Political Controversy course that I believe should be a standard part of high school curriculums in the United States. The intelligent design movement should be studied and assessed in that course, at least until it is replaced by some other religious antievolution movement. It should not, however, be tolerated in the biology classroom.

Allegiance and Ceremony

Now consider another issue of contemporary controversy: the American pledge of allegiance. This is the official pledge of political fidelity that by tradition is recited in schools and on some ceremonial occasions. For some decades the ritual pledge has included, by act of Congress, a reasonably ecumenical religious declaration: the pledge recites that America is “one nation under God.” The pledge is voluntary; the Supreme Court held long ago, even before this reference to God was made part of the pledge, that schoolchildren could not be forced to recite it. People drawn to the tolerant religious model support the religious reference in the official pledge because they believe it both symbolizes and achieves an indispensable fusion of religion and patriotism. They point out that since no one is required to recite the official pledge, no one is forced into an act that contradicts his conscience. They might acknowledge that an American who stands silent while the crowd around him recites the pledge is made to feel an outsider. That is nevertheless his choice, however; if he cannot subscribe to an ecumenical endorsement of monotheism, he is an outsider, and there can be harm in reminding him and everyone else of that fact.

But dignity does not simply command that no one be forced to recite what he does not believe. It assigns us a positive responsibility to choose ethical values for ourselves, and though, as I said, we know we are influenced by a thousand dimensions of culture in making those choices, we must nevertheless refuse to accept subordination to a government that deliberately and coercively manipulates our choices. There can be no distributive justification for creating an official pledge that makes full citizens feel like outsiders. There can be only a personally judgmental justification: deliberately influencing the shared culture to associate religion and patriotism, on the ground that that association is desirable, in a way that makes it more difficult for someone who wishes to embrace patriotism free of religion to do so. It is plainly part of people’s responsibility for their own values to define for themselves the religious or metaphysical assumptions of political allegiance. The coercive impact of an officially endorsed ritual is no more acceptable than the open manipulation of compelled assertion.

That coercive impact is in fact not very strong, however, and so though the official pledge is a violation of liberty, it is not a practically serious one. Just as an atheist can fish in his pocket for a coin that bears a message of trust in God or stand at the opening ceremony of prayer in congressional or court sessions without any sense of self-betrayal, so he can mouth the words of the pledge without loss of integrity. Few children treat the detailed wording of the pledge they recite in school as having the authority even of the solemn vows they make in the playground. But that means only that the intended purpose of making the pledge theological has failed, not that that purpose is in itself legitimate.

There is, in my view, even less reason for concern about a subject that has much occupied the federal courts: public displays of ceremonial icons that have a religious heritage and association but that also play a nonreligious civic role as centerpieces of festivity. It is true that public Christmas trees are bought with taxes collected from nonbelievers, but the expense is trivial. It would be wrong for a community to recognize the great occasions of only one of the religions of its members, which explains why Christmas trees are now often flanked by menorahs and no doubt, when suitable, crescents as well. Equality of concern and respect for citizens is an independent requirement. But, as the Supreme Court has come to recognize in a series of awkward opinions, there is precious little endorsement of religion in these public displays, and nonbelievers can comfortably enjoy their secular significance with no more sense of inauthenticity than they feel when they spend a quarter.

Marriage

My final example—gay marriage—is a very different matter. The institution of marriage is unique; it is a distinct mode of association and commitment that carries centuries and volumes of social and personal meaning. We can no more create an alternative mode of commitment carrying a parallel intensity of meaning than we can create a substitute for poetry or for love. The status of marriage is therefore a social resource of irreplaceable value to those to whom it is offered; it enables two people together to create value in their lives that they could not create if that institution had never existed. We know that people of the same sex often love one another with the same passion as people of different sexes do. If we allow a heterosexual couple access to that wonderful resource but deny it to a homosexual couple, we make it possible for one pair but not the other to realize what they both believe to be an important value in their lives. By what right may society discriminate in that way?

Since we accept the principle of personal responsibility and recognize the rights that it entails, we need a particularly compelling justification, which must not be a personally judgmental justification, for a discrimination of that magnitude. The opponents of gay marriage who have tried to furnish a nonjudgmental justification have had to resort to thoroughly speculative hypotheses. The judges who dissented in the Massachusetts Supreme Court from that court’s recognition of gay marriage suggested that a ban might be justified because a heterosexual marriage provides a better background than homosexual unions for raising children. There is no good, let alone compelling, evidence for that opinion, however. The perception itself reflects a judgmental religious perspective, and it is anyway belied by the practice, in Massachusetts as well as other states, of permitting unmarried same-sex couples to adopt children.

There is an even more popular justification: that society does not discriminate against homosexuals if it forbids same-sex marriages but creates same-sex civil unions that provide most or all of the material advantages of marriage. That argument refutes itself. If there is no difference between the material and legal consequences of marriage or a contrived civil union, then why should marriage be reserved for heterosexuals? That can be only because marriage has a spiritual dimension that civil union does not. This may be a religious dimension, which some same-sex couples want as much as heterosexuals do. Or it may be the resonance of history and culture that I described and that both kinds of couples covet. But whatever it is, if there are reasons for withholding the status from gay couples, then these must also be reasons why civil union is not an equivalent opportunity.

The only genuine argument against gay marriage—the argument that actually generates such fierce opposition to it—has the same form as the argument for a religious pledge of allegiance, but the stakes are of course very much higher. The case against gay marriage, put most sympathetically, comes to this: the institution of marriage is, as I said, a unique and immensely valuable cultural resource. Its meaning and hence its value have accreted organically over centuries, and the assumption that marriage is the union of a man and a woman is so embedded in its meaning that it would become a different institution, and hence a less valuable institution, were that assumption now challenged and lost. Just as we might struggle to maintain the meaning and value of any other great natural or artistic resource, so we should struggle to retain this uniquely valuable cultural resource.

That argument captures the appeal of the opposition to gay marriage, but it must be rejected because, as I hope is now clear, it contradicts the premise of our shared ideals of liberty and the personal responsibility that liberty protects. This becomes dramatically clear when we substitute “religion” for “marriage” in the argument I just constructed. Everything I said about the cultural heritage and value of marriage is equally true of the general institution of religion: religion is an irreplaceable cultural resource in which billions of people find immense and incomparable value. Its meaning, like that of marriage, has accreted over a great many centuries. But its meaning, again like that of marriage, is subject to quite dramatic change through organic processes as new religions and sects develop and as new threats to established doctrine and practice are generated by secular developments in science, politics, or theories of social justice. People’s sense of what religion is has been altered, in recent decades, by the feminist movement, for instance, which demands women priests, by the rise and fall in popular imagination of various forms of mysticism, hallucinogenic experimentation, pantheism, Unitarianism, fundamentalist doctrines, radical liberation movements, and by a thousand other shifts in religious impulse that began in individual decision and ended in seismic changes in what religion can and does mean. American religious conservatives, even those who regard themselves as evangelical, do not imagine that the cultural meaning of religion should be frozen by laws prohibiting people with new visions from access to the title, legal status, or tax and economic benefits of religious organization.

The cultural argument against gay marriage I described is therefore inconsistent with the instincts and insight we almost all share and that I suggest are captured in the second principle of human dignity. The argument supposes that the culture that shapes our values is the property only of some of us—those who happen to enjoy political power for the moment—to sculpt and protect in the shape we admire. That is a deep mistake; in a genuinely free society, the world of ideas and values belongs to no one and to everyone. Who will argue—not just declare—that I am wrong? 

=============================================================================== 

➀ See Bob Jones III Retiring from University, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/6850482/from/RL.5/.

➁ See Joseph Loconte, “Isaiah Was a Democrat,” International Herald Tribune, January 3, 2006.

➂ See “How Family’s Cause Reached the Halls of Congress,” New York Times, March 22, 2005, section A, p. 1.

➃ See John Danforth, “In the Name of Politics,” New York Times, March 30, 2005, section A, p. 17.

➄ New York Times, November 4, 2004, section A, p. 25.

➅ Lynch v. Donnelly, 465 U.S. 668 (1984).

➆ See the dissenting opinion of Justice Potter Stewart in Abington School District v. Schempp, 374. U.S. 2003 (1963).

➇ United States v. Macintosh, 283 U.S. 605 (1931). Gingrich, Winning the Future, ix, 69.

➈ Zorach v. Clauson, 343 U.S. 306 (1952).

➉ Engel v. Vitale 370 U.S. 421 (1962).

⑪ Allegheny County v. ACLU, 492 U.S. 573 (1989), Justice Kennedy dissenting.

⑫ See my discussion of Rawls’s idea of public reason in Justice in Robes, chapter 9.

⑬ John Rawls, Collected Papers (Harvard University Press, 1997), 588–89.

⑭ Gingrich, Winning the Future, xxi.

⑮ My formulation runs against the grain of much contemporary political philosophy because it merges different values that philosophers like to keep distinct; it makes the scope of liberty depend on other values, including those of distributive justice. See the discussion of democracy in chapter 5. I defend my view that political values cannot be understood independently of one another in Justice in Robes, chapter 6, and, at a more philosophical level, in Justice for Hedgehogs.

⑯ United States v. Seegar, 380 U.S. 163, 166 (1965).

⑰ Planned Parenthood of Pennsylvania v. Casey, 505 US 833 (1992).

⑱ Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003).

⑲ Gingrich, Winning the Future, ix, 69.

⑳ Dworkin, Life’s Dominion.

㉑ See Denise Grady, “Study Finds 29-Week Fetuses Probably Feel No Pain and Need No Abortion Anesthesia,” New York Times, August 24, 2005, section A, p. 10.

㉒ I discuss the question of the interests of people dead or unconscious in Life’s Dominion.

㉓ Kitzmiller et al. v. Dover Area School Board, Federal District Court Middle Area Pennsylvania, Judge John Jones Memorandum Opinion, December 20, 2005.

㉔ Elisabeth Bumiller, “Bush Remarks Roil Debate over Teaching of Evolution,” New York Times, August 3, 2005, section A, p. 14.

㉕ David Stout, “Frist Urges 2 Teachings on Life Origin,” New York Times, August 20, 2005, section A, p. 10.

㉖ See Kitzmiller et al. v. Dover Area School Board. For a very clear statement of the scientific errors in the intelligent design argument, see Philip M. Boffey, “The Evolution Wars, Revisited,” New York Times on the Web, http://select.nytimes.com/2006/01/18/opinion/18talkingpoints.html?pagewanted=all8dpc.

㉗ Bumiller, “Bush Remarks Roil.”

