Chapter 4 Taxes and Legitimacy

Tax and Spend

So far, I have discussed two of the most dramatic issues that seem to divide Americans into rival cultural camps, conservative and liberal or, if you prefer, red and blue. May we ignore the traditional rights of our own domestic criminal process in confronting the terrorist threat? What role should religion play in our politics, our government, and our public life? Now we take up a third issue that is equally divisive and has more consequence than either of those two for the day-to-day lives of almost all our citizens: taxes.

In his first term, President Bush engineered very dramatic tax reductions, even more dramatic because they took effect during a very expensive military campaign. By 2005, Congress, at his behest, had reduced taxes by $1.8 trillion over ten years, and these tax reductions had favored the richest Americans. In that year Bush and Republican leaders of Congress proposed further tax cuts and also proposed to make the tax cuts already achieved permanent. Hurricane Katrina, which devastated New Orleans and other parts of the Gulf states, shocked America because the government’s tardy and ineffective response suggested a lack of concern for the poor residents of those areas, most of them black, whose lives had been ruined. This political reaction, and also the growing distaste of some moderate Republicans for further tax cuts while the government was cutting social programs to help pay for the reconstruction of the Gulf area, forced the Republican leadership to postpone, at least, these further tax cuts. “Obviously, the juxtaposition of cutting taxes and food stamps within a few days is not attractive,” said James T. Walsh, a Republican congressman from New York.➀ But the president continues to call for the further tax cuts he believes desirable.

The distribution of wealth and income in the United States is striking. In 2001, 1 percent of our population owned more than a third of our wealth, the top 10 percent of the population owned 70 percent of it, and the bottom 50 percent only 2.8 percent.➁ In 2001, according to United States Census Bureau figures, the top 20 percent in income earned more than 50 percent of aggregate income, and the top 5 percent earned more than 22 percent.➂ In 2004, according to a report by the Institute for Policy Studies, the average chief executive in large companies earned 431 times as much as the average worker in those companies.➃

Bush’s tax cuts have made the great gap between rich and poor even greater. The Brookings Institution Tax Policy Center calculated that more than half of the benefits of one provision—exempting corporate dividends from income tax—would flow to the top 5 percent of the population. This tax reduction gave each person with an income of over a million dollars a year on average more than five hundred times the benefit it gave each person with an income of under $100,000.➄

Republican leaders say that these tax cuts for the rich were necessary to stimulate the economy. But Bush’s tax cuts have converted a multitrillion-dollar surplus, which he inherited, into an unprecedented and dangerous fiscal deficit—Congress’s budget agency has predicted between $3.5 and $4 trillion in the next decade—without helping the overall economy much, if at all.➅ The improvements in the economy since 2001 have benefited, once again, mainly the rich; median household income since then has  actually fallen,➆ and the average income of American families fell by 2.3 percent in 2004.➇ As the president’s own Council of Economic Advisers predicted, the tax cuts have contributed minimally to job growth.➈ In fact, as the New York Times reported,

  Job growth during the Bush-era recovery has been worse, by far, than in any comparable economic upturn since the 1960’s. It would take some 500,000 new jobs a month every month this year just to equal the second worst job-creation record in the modern era. And while working Americans are laboring harder, hourly wages and weekly salaries—the financial lifeblood of most Americans—have been flat or falling, after inflation, since the middle of 2003.➉

In 2002 Joseph Stiglitz, a Nobel Prize–winning economist, said, “If I were making a list of tax cuts to stimulate the economy, [Bush’s] dividend tax cut would not make the short list.”⑪

The political battle over taxes is not primarily a matter of economic forecasts, however. Many conservatives want taxes to be lower because they wish to reduce or eliminate the welfare programs that taxes make possible. Over the last seven decades or so—since the Roosevelt presidency brought what we call the New Deal—people in the successful democracies have largely come to accept that it is part of government’s role to provide a fairer distribution of their nation’s wealth than a free market economy achieves unaided. Taxes are the principal mechanism through which government plays this redistributive role. It collects money in taxes at progressive rates so that the rich pay a higher percentage of their income or wealth than the poor, and it uses the money it collects to finance a variety of programs that provide unemployment and retirement benefits, health care, aid to children in poverty, food supplements, subsidized housing, and other benefits.

Conservatives believe that this role of government should be reduced and that tax reductions are an appropriate means to that goal because, they think, taxation at even its present level is unfair to those who work hard for their income and who make possible a vibrant economy that benefits everyone. They believe that successful entrepreneurs have contributed most of all through their skill and investment courage and should not be penalized with high taxes for their success. They do not think it unfair that the rich have received the lion’s share of Bush’s tax cuts; they think these cuts only begin to repair the past unfairness of progressive tax rates. Liberals believe, on the contrary, that welfare provision for the poor is already much too meager in this country, and that reducing the taxes paid by the rich, which makes that provision even more meager, is deeply unfair. So the main arguments on both sides are arguments of fairness. In this chapter I hope both to deepen and to shape the disagreement by proposing a connection between tax levels and not just the fairness but the legitimacy of our government. At some point, I shall argue, government’s failure to redistribute the wealth that a lightly regulated free market produces weakens government’s claim to the respect and allegiance of all its citizens.

Conservatives are apparently winning the tax battle, in the United States at least. The only American presidential candidate who campaigned promising across-the-board tax raises in recent decades—Walter Mondale in 1984—lost in a landslide. George H. W. Bush asked people to watch his lips as he mouthed “No new taxes” when he won the presidency in 1988, and his subsequent defeat by Bill Clinton in 1992 is thought to be due, at least in part, to his loss of conservative support when he did, after all, raise taxes. No major-party politician proposes general tax increases now. In his 2004 campaign, John Kerry promised to raise taxes on people with incomes of $200,000 or more; Bush replied that this proposal showed that Kerry was just another “tax and spend liberal.” We do not know how much that charge affected people’s votes, but it is remarkable—and a contradiction of conventional political wisdom—how many people voted against what they should have seen to be in their own economic interest. Only very few people make more than $200,000 or suppose that they will. That might mean only that economic issues were swamped by either security or religious issues. But it does suggest that a great many people reject the Democrats’ claim that Bush’s tax policy is plainly unfair.

The argument about taxes has been characteristically shrill because, as in the case of the issues we considered in the last two chapters, it has no structure. We trade slogans. Liberals say that conservatives want to soak the poor, and conservatives say that liberals want to spend other people’s money. Neither side seems able to define the level of tax it believes would be fair. So liberals complain that taxes are too low, and conservatives that they are too high, without either side being able to offer any account of how high or how low they should be and why.

I shall propose a structure for formulating contrasting answers to that question so as to make a genuine argument possible. Once again I propose to start with the principles of human dignity that I identified in chapter 1 and explored in the last two chapters. What tax policies must we pursue if we accept as foundational that human lives have intrinsic value and that each person has a personal responsibility for identifying and realizing the potential value in his own life? It is not immediately apparent what those principles do require in the area of finance, the domain of tax and spend. That is what we must now investigate.

Political Legitimacy and Equal Concern

If we accept that it is equally intrinsically important that every human life go well, then we must not treat any other human being as if his life were a matter of no great consequence. Treating him that way would demean us all, us as well as him. But—contrary to what some philosophers have suggested—that does not mean that we must always act with the same concern for everyone else’s welfare as we show for ourselves and those close to us. Mostly we act with our own goals and tastes and responsibilities in mind: I may help my own children without feeling any obligation to help yours to the same degree. As individuals we owe all other human beings a measure of concern, but we do not owe them concern equal to that we have for ourselves, our families, and others close to us.

But the relation of a state to its members—the relation of all Americans collectively to each American separately—is a very different matter. Government must indeed show an equal concern for each of the people over whom it claims dominion. The government we elect exercises dramatic coercive power. It forces individual citizens to act in ways that we, through it, demand. We extract people’s money or property through taxes, and we put them in jail or even, in our country, kill them when they do not do what we command. We not only do all this but claim a right to do it: we expect our fellow citizens to treat our collective demands as creating not just threats but moral obligations, the demanding moral obligation to obey our law. No single individual has any such power over other individuals. Our government claims all of it.

We must satisfy moral conditions before we are entitled to that authority. Not every group of people with power, even if it constitutes a majority in some population, is morally entitled to use the coercive apparatus of police and army to work its will; not every group with power can plausibly claim to impose moral obligations by fiat. What conditions must people with power meet in order to be entitled to act as governments act, so that those from whom they claim obedience are in fact morally obliged to obey? That question—of political legitimacy—is the oldest question of political philosophy. It has new urgency in our fragile world order when established governments are challenged and overthrown and political communities are reconfigured almost monthly. But it is also urgent even in mature and stable nations like our own when important issues of justice arise.

What test must a government meet to be legitimate? We cannot say that it is not legitimate unless it is perfectly just: that would be too strong a requirement because no existing government is perfectly just. Many political philosophers have suggested that legitimacy depends not on justice but on consent. No nation is legitimate, they say, unless its constitution enjoys the unanimous consent of those it governs. But this again is much too strong—there are dissenters in every political community— and philosophers have had to dilute this theory with various fictions. They say that citizens give their tacit consent to the authority of a government when they remain in the territory that it governs. But few citizens have any practical possibility of emigration, so some philosophers propose a weaker test still: they say that a government is legitimate if its citizens would consent to its authority under certain ideal conditions: if they were rational and in possession of all the facts, for instance. But even that is usually untrue. In any case, a hypothetical consent is no consent at all, so this amendment of the theory amends the theory away.

If it would be too demanding to insist that only a perfectly just government, or only a government all of whose citizens consent to its authority, is legitimate, then what test should we use to decide whether a government is legitimate? Recall the distinction I drew in chapter 2 between political rights and human rights; the same distinction is in point now. I emphasized the crucial difference between two questions. The first asks what a government is required to do according to the best, most accurate understanding of the two principles of human dignity. That is the question of citizens’ political rights, the question we should debate in our ordinary political arguments. It is the question of justice. The second asks a different, more interpretive, question. What behavior of government would indicate that it has either not accepted the two principles as constraints on its conduct or that it is acting inconsistently with its own understanding of what they require? That is the question of human rights, and it is also the test of political legitimacy.

A plausible theory of legitimacy must proceed without any assumption of real or hypothetical unanimous consent. It must proceed on the different assumption that when citizens are born into a political community or join that community later, they just have obligations to that community, including the obligation to respect its laws whether or not they explicitly or even tacitly accept those obligations. But they assume these political obligations only if and so long as the community’s government respects their human dignity. Only so long, that is, as it accepts the equal importance of their lives and their personal responsibility for their own lives and tries to govern them in accordance with its sincere judgment of what those dimensions of dignity require. I can have no obligation to a community that treats me as a second-class citizen; the apartheid government of South Africa had no legitimate authority over blacks, and the governments of antebellum American states had no legitimate authority over the slaves they treated as only property.

A legitimate government must treat all those over whom it claims dominion not just with a measure of concern but with equal concern. I mean that it must act as if the impact of its policies on the life of any citizen is equally important. On this account political legitimacy is not an all-or-nothing matter but a matter of degree. A government elected under procedures that allow a majority of the people to replace it in due course and that by and large accepts the responsibilities of equal concern and personal responsibility may be sufficiently legitimate so that wholesale disobedience would not be justified even if some of its policies—its tax policies, for example—show an indifference to human dignity that, if it were much more general, would forfeit legitimacy altogether. South Africa could not claim any political allegiance from its black citizens because its disregard of the equal importance of their lives was total. An otherwise legitimate state whose tax policies show an isolated contempt for the poor may be morally vulnerable to a limited and targeted civil disobedience but not to revolution.

I shall be concerned with the question of legitimacy as well as of justice in the rest of this chapter. I shall ask whether our present government’s economic policies have reached a plateau of indifference to the poor that shows not just an eccentric view of their rights as equal citizens but an egregious lapse in its concern for those rights. That question is of course not answered by the popularity of the government’s programs. I noted in chapter 1 that many citizens who were made poorer by the Bush administration’s tax cuts nevertheless voted for his reelection and continue to support his programs in polls. Some commentators suggest, as I reported there, that these voters’ cultural identification with Bush’s religious values were more important to them than their economic fate under his policies.⑫ Other commentators suppose that so many Americans favor tax policies that benefit the rich because they believe, on very slender evidence, that they might be rich themselves one day, that voting Republican is in that respect like buying a lottery ticket.⑬ None of that matters when we are considering the legitimacy of the government’s tax policies. Even if many of the poor think the government is showing them the requisite concern, others do not, and we must ask which view is right.

Nothing I have said so far about political legitimacy takes sides in any argument between conservatives and liberals, however. My account of legitimacy may be controversial as a matter of philosophy, but it is not, I hope, controversial politically. So we may now return to the subject of taxation with common ground intact. Here is our question: what tax policy must government adopt if it is to treat everyone in the political community with equal concern? If it assumes that it has the same responsibilities of care and attention toward each of its citizens?

Laissez-Faire and Small Government

We start by recognizing that just about everything the government of a large political community does—or does not do—affects the resources each of its citizens has with which to face his life. So a state cannot escape the demands of equal concern by disavowing responsibility for the economic position of any citizen. Of course, the resource that any citizen has at any given moment is a function of many variables, including his physical and mental powers and abilities, his past choices, his luck, the attitudes of others toward him, and his power or desire to produce what others want. We may call these his personal economic variables. But the upshot of all these personal variables for his actual resources and opportunities will in every case also depend on political variables: on the laws and policies of the communities in which he lives or works. We may call these laws and policies the political settlement.

The tax laws are of course an important part of the political settlement, but every other part of the law belongs to the political settlement as well: fiscal and monetary policy, labor law, environmental law and policy, urban planning, foreign policy, health care policy, transportation policy, drug and food regulation, and everything else. Changing any of these policies or laws would change the distribution of personal wealth and opportunity in the community, given the same choices, luck, attitudes, and other personal variables of each person.

So government cannot avoid the challenge of equal concern by arguing that the resources an individual has depend on his choices not the government’s choices. It depends on both. The political settlement, which is under government’s control, fixes the consequences for each individual for each of the sets of choices about education, training, employment, investment, production, and leisure he might make and for each of the events of good or bad luck he may encounter. So we may now rephrase our question in this somewhat more structured way. Given the complex and dramatic impact of a political settlement on citizens’ individual resources, what choice of political settlement treats citizens with equal concern? What choice would the fair-minded parent of them all make, for example? What is the role of taxes in that fairminded political settlement, and what rates of taxation would it require for people of different levels of wealth and income?

Now it might be said that government is not the parent of its citizens, that adult citizens must stand on their own feet, and that government should leave them free to get on with their lives as best they can without handouts through the tax system or in any other way. But that laissez-faire advice ignores the point I just made: that government simply cannot leave its citizens alone, that since anything it does affects what people have, it must take into account that consequence of whatever it does. Of course we can, if that is what a majority of us wish, create a minimalist government with few powers to do anything except maintain police forces and armies and raise only the taxes necessary to those limited powers. But that would be a political decision taken collectively by all of us in our political capacities, and we would therefore have the responsibility of showing how our decision to create a minimal state, when we might have created a government with much greater powers to help our poorer fellow citizens, treats all of us with equal concern.

Imagine this reply: “Just because everything that government does has distributive consequences, it does not follow that government should consider those consequences in deciding what to do. On the contrary, each element of the political settlement should be decided without reference to its distributive results. Let conservation policy dictate conservation laws, foreign policy dictate trade alliances, military policy dictate the military budget, and so on, and then let the distributive chips fall where they may.”

This is not a possible strategy, however, because each of these policy decisions involves budget and allocation decisions, and these are automatically distributive decisions. How can officials decide how much to spend on military hardware without also deciding how much to spend on education and health care, and how can they decide those questions without a theory about what the citizens of all economic classes are entitled to have? Moreover, how can they decide how much to spend on military force without deciding how much tax it would be fair to raise, and how can they decide that without deciding from whom it would be fair to extract taxes and in what shares? There is no neutral, laissez-faire answer to that question. Even ultraconservatives would have choices to make. As I said, they would need a distributive theory even to justify choosing a minimalist government, or even to choose between the flat-rate tax scheme that some conservatives favor, which means that rich people pay at the same rate but pay more in total taxes, or Margaret Thatcher’s poll tax scheme, under which everyone, rich and poor, pays exactly the same amount.

So the laissez-faire state is an illusion. Of course we can say, if we wish, that once we have fixed the political settlement in the right way, people must be left free to make such transactions with one another—about wage and price, for example—as they can, and that the state should not disturb the result of those bargains. But obviously this is not a way of avoiding the question of which political settlement treats people with equal concern; on the contrary, it assumes that the political settlement in force does just that.

We should consider one further way in which conservatives might hope to blunt the force of my question. They might claim that government treats people as equals when it pursues some collective, overall goal that does not require it to consider the fairness of the resulting distribution as an independent question. Suppose, for example, that government aims at whatever political settlement will make the community in the long run most prosperous overall, measured in aggregate financial terms, or happiest overall, measured in some psychological coin. That policy might justify very great inequality of resources—low taxes on highincome executives to encourage them to work even harder, perhaps—but it might nevertheless be said to treat everyone with equal concern because it counts the wealth or happiness of each equally in considering which policies make the community richest or happiest in aggregate.

But this appeal to aggregate goals immediately raises a further question of equal concern. The government might not have chosen an aggregate goal. Or it might have chosen a different overall goal: for example, a more complex goal that aims at aggregate prosperity or happiness but limits the inequality this might produce by providing that no one’s wealth may be permitted to fall below a stipulated floor even if preventing this means that aggregate wealth or happiness is not as great as it might otherwise be. So the question must be asked: does government show equal concern for everyone if it adopts an unqualified aggregate goal as the basis for the community’s political settlement rather than a different or qualified goal that would produce somewhat better lives for those at the bottom of the economic ladder? If the resulting inequality is too great, it would be hard for government to justify the claim that it has nevertheless shown equal concern through its choice of an unqualified aggregate goal. Imagine that a family is about to buy a new house and wishes to buy the house with the largest aggregate bedroom space, measured in overall square feet, that it can afford. Does it show equal concern for its members if it buys the house with the largest average bedroom size even though one bedroom, which it knows will be occupied by the youngest child, is miserably dark and insufferably small?

Personal Responsibility

My argument so far might be thought to recommend a very radical conclusion: that a government shows equal concern for all its citizens only by arranging its political settlement so that each has the same resources no matter what choices he has made and how his luck has fallen. But that is too quick a conclusion because government must also respect the second principle of human dignity, which assigns each citizen a personal responsibility to identify and realize value in his own life. There is much truth in the objection I imagined earlier to my analogy between government and a family. Adults are not children for whom someone else must or should make important decisions; indeed not even all children are children in that sense. We need a conception of equal concern that respects the personal responsibility of citizens as well as the intrinsic value of their lives, and that requirement substantially limits how far government can ensure that all citizens have the same resources available to them at all times.

Suppose, for example, a radically egalitarian economic policy that collects all the community’s resources once a year and redistributes them equally so as to cancel out all the transactions of the past year and leave people free to start all over again on equal terms. That would be like sweeping up all the Monopoly money and property every quarter of an hour and beginning again, which would of course ruin the game because then no choice would have any consequences for anyone. It would not matter what anyone did. The radical egalitarian economic policy would have the same result at least financially: people would be insulated from the economic consequences of their acts and therefore unable to take any responsibility for the economic dimension of their own lives. In such a world I could not stay in school longer in order to hold a higher-paying job later or economize now in order to educate my children better or make a shrewd investment in hopes of realizing a profit. None of these choices would make any sense because I would end in the same economic position whatever I did; I could take no financial responsibility for my own choices because my own choices would have no financial consequences at all.

A less radical egalitarian program would compromise personal responsibility less thoroughly but still substantially. Consider, for example, John Rawls’s much admired theory of justice, according to which a community’s political settlement should aim, once important liberties are adequately protected, that the least well-off group in the community be as well-off as possible. That does not mean that all citizens should have the same money and other resources. It might well be that allowing talented people to keep more of the money they earn would encourage them to work harder, which would benefit the worst-off group because it would then have more wealth absolutely than if wealth were kept equal. Critics have objected that Rawls’s principle ignores the fact that relative wealth matters as well as absolute wealth. They say that it is better when everyone has a thousand dollars than when the poorest people have two thousand and the richest millions.

I want now to make a different and in my view more serious objection, however. Rawls defines the worst-off group just in terms of the resources its members have, with no discrimination between those who are badly off because they have fallen ill or have had bad luck and those who are badly off because they have chosen not to work as hard as other people do or not to work at all. So his proposal does not make the fate of someone in this worst-off class depend in any way on that person’s personal choices or responsibility; if he is in that class, he will receive whatever redistributive benefits are needed to make members of that class as rich as they can be, whichever choices he makes about work. It might improve the overall position of the worst-off class for the state to pay benefits not only to people who cannot work but to people who can work but prefer to comb beaches instead. So Rawls’s scheme also cuts the connection between personal choice and personal fate that the principle of personal responsibility requires.

This is not an oversight in Rawls’s theory of justice; he aimed to create what he called a political conception of justice that people could accept no matter what more comprehensive views they hold about such ethical matters as whether one should accept personal responsibility for one’s situation in life. As I said in chapter 3, he hoped that in public debate people would appeal to and argue about only political principles, not private ethical ideals about how people should live their lives.⑭ I explained there why I disagree. In my view we cannot construct a genuine argument in America now about the role of religion in public life if we accept such a limitation, because our distinctly political convictions are now too sharply different. We must try to identify more comprehensive ethical principles about dignity and personal responsibility that we share and then try to explore which of our conflicting political principles are more securely grounded in those more fundamental ethical convictions. We must follow the same strategy if we hope to create a public debate about the subject of this chapter. Our distinctly political views about government’s responsibility for helping the poor and unfortunate among us are now starkly confrontational: the intuitions of conservatives tend to reject or limit any such public responsibility, and those of liberals tend to accept and expand it. If we hope to argue constructively with one another, we must broaden the ground of argument, and we cannot do that without including, as part of the argument, questions about the personal responsibility of people for their own economic fate. We must reject any egalitarian scheme that purports not to recognize that responsibility at all.

So the political settlement of a nation that is committed to the two principles of human dignity that I am assuming we share must satisfy two conditions that are very demanding, and it must satisfy them taken together. The nation’s political settlement creates the distribution of wealth that flows from each imaginable set of personal variables—from each set of choices its citizens might make and all the good and bad luck they might encounter. That settlement must treat all those over whom the community claims dominion with equal concern, and it must also respect their personal responsibility. A theory of just taxation must therefore include not only a theory of what equal concern demands on the best understanding but also a conception of the true consequences of personal responsibility, and it must find a way to satisfy both of these requirements in the same structure.

If we are to argue sensibly about either the justice or the legitimacy of Bush’s tax policies, each side, conservative and liberal, must try to construct a theory of just taxation that meets these two conditions and supports its position. In the next several sections of this chapter, I shall construct and argue for a theory that I believe clarifies the liberal position and shows its true strength. I shall then consider what plausible objections conservatives might make to my argument and attempt to reply to those objections. It remains for conservatives to construct an alternative theory for assessing tax policies in the light of their different understanding of the two principles. If they can construct a sufficiently plausible theory that justifies our present low-tax policies, then even if that theory is not wholly convincing, it would nevertheless rebut my suspicion that our present tax policy fails not only in justice but in legitimacy as well. If they cannot, that suspicion would be strengthened.

I should respond to one possible objection to this way of proceeding. It might be said that I am wrongly isolating the tax issue from other issues of social justice. It might seem that many very different kinds of political settlements in which taxes play very different roles would satisfy the two principles of human dignity and that some of these would not rely on a redistributive tax scheme very much, if at all, so that we cannot say that any particular kind of tax scheme is inevitably required for either justice or legitimacy.⑮ A socialist society, for example, might assign jobs, fix wages, and provide housing, health care, and other benefits in such a way that everyone has a roughly equal standard of living; in that way it might hope to meet the requirements of equal concern without relying on the taxation and redistribution of wealth as an important weapon.

But a socialist society whose economy was so heavily controlled by collective decisions could not satisfy the further requirement that it respect personal responsibility. A community can respect that requirement only if it leaves its citizens very largely free to make their own decisions about work, leisure, investment, and consumption, and only if it leaves fixing prices and wages very largely to market forces. (I have defended that claim at length elsewhere.)⑯ But if a community does allow personal choice that decisive role in fixing prices, wages, and other economic facts, and if allowing personal choice that role results in a distribution of wealth so unequal that a government of equal concern must redistribute that wealth in some way, then it must indeed rely on a tax scheme to accomplish this. So our question can properly be put as a question about what kind of tax scheme is needed in a society that both shows equal concern and respects personal freedom.

Equality Ex Post and Ex Ante

I cannot now propose a very detailed tax scheme. Too much depends on facts I do not know and that would in any case soon change. That is why I promised a tax theory rather than a detailed tax scheme. Even so, we can improve on the flabby rhetoric in which the confrontation over taxes is now expressed. Since I am concerned with the question of legitimacy as well as of justice, I shall try to construct a structure that allows us to ask not only what level and kind of taxation would be optimal but also what level would seem too low to defend as even a good-faith attempt to treat the poor with equal concern. I shall concentrate on the question of who must pay what in taxes, rather than on the equally important question of how the money raised should be spent. I shall assume only that it is to be spent in ways that reduce effective inequality within the community either through transfers of money or commodities to individuals, as through unemployment compensation or a food stamp program, or through more collective in-kind welfare programs such as public housing or state health care provision. These questions of expenditure are of course complex and important, but we focus now on the tax side of the tax-and-spend equation.

I repeat what I just emphasized. The principle of personal responsibility requires a mainly free-market economic organization so that people one by one, rather than their governments, fix the main structural elements of the economic culture in which they live, including the prices of the different kinds of goods they choose to buy and the rent of the labor they choose to offer. Only in that way can people exercise their responsibility to identify and realize value in their own lives, because only then does the price of what one person buys or produces reflect the value it has for others. Only a wide-ranging economic market respects that imperative of personal responsibility.

But of course a market produces very great inequality not just because some people make more expensive choices about how much or how little to work and what to consume, but, even more dramatically, because some people are better than others at producing what others value and some people have better luck in their investments and in their accidents and health. A community that has equal concern for all its citizens cannot simply ignore the latter variables of talent and luck because it could have chosen an entirely different political settlement that would have achieved a very different distribution with much less inequality. Even if its programs are very popular with the electorate as a whole, including those who do not benefit materially from those programs, it must be able to explain to those who are not satisfied why its choice of a market system with the structure it chose treats them with equal concern in spite of the poor position to which that choice has condemned them. Redistribution through policies of tax and spend seems the obvious solution, because taxation takes hold after people have made their choices, and it therefore affects prices and choices less than a more forced economy would do.

We must therefore begin to construct a tax theory by assuming that a community treats citizens with equal concern when its economic system allows them genuinely equal opportunities to design a life according to their own values. They have equal opportunities, let us say, when their wealth and other resources depend on the value and costs of their choices, but not on their luck, including their genetic luck in parents and talents. This ideal cannot be realized perfectly, for various reasons I have described elsewhere,⑰ but we can adopt it as an ideal standard in trying to define both an optimally just tax program and a minimally redistributive tax program that is consistent with legitimacy. We now need to make a crucial distinction, however, because government might aim to make people equal in that way at different points in their lives, and it matters very much which point it selects. A technical distinction drawn from economics will be useful in explaining this choice: the distinction between ex post and ex ante equality.

A community has established full ex post equality when the differences in its citizens’ wealth can be fully explained at all times by the choices they have made about whether and how much to work and how much to save or spend, when what they have depends only on those choices and has not been affected by any differences in their talents or in the luck they have had in their investments or health. So when someone’s wealth falls below what other people have because he lacks the talent to work at a high-paying job that they can manage, or because he has fallen ill and is unable to work, or because he has had huge medical expenses through no fault of his own, then a government committed to ex post equality undertakes, so far as this is possible, to restore him to the position he would have held but for these disabilities or accidents. A government aims at ex ante equality, on the other hand, when it does all it can to put people in an equal position in advance of any turns of fate that might make them unequal—in advance, that is, of the events or circumstances that count as good or bad luck. It can improve ex ante equality, for example, by arranging that all citizens have an opportunity to buy on equal terms the appropriate insurance against low productive talent or bad luck.

Ex post equality might seem initially to be exactly what genuine equal concern requires. After all, someone who is badly injured or crippled and receives only an insurance settlement by way of compensation is still much worse off than if he had not been injured at all. If the community can do better by him, an equal concern for his fate would seem to argue that it should do better. Many egalitarians insist that only ex post equality will suffice as a general political ideal.

I disagree; conservatives are right to reject ex post equality as a sensible or even defensible goal. It suffers from a variety of defects that make ex ante equality a superior ideal for politics. First, a good part of the difference that luck makes in people’s lives is due to investment luck. You and I both study the stock market with equal care and make equally intelligent, though different, choices. Your stocks thrive and mine wither; you are rich and I am poor, and this is only because your luck has been better than mine. But the community cannot undertake to restore me to equality with you without destroying the whole institution of economic investment and the economy along with it. If neither of us in the end gains or loses by our investment choices, our choices have been pointless, and we will cease making them. That would not only make all our lives worse but would violate our personal responsibility as well in the way I described earlier in this chapter in rejecting radical egalitarian theories of justice. Most of the important decisions we make in life are investment decisions whose outcome depends to a considerable degree on our luck. The success of any decision to train for or take up one career rather than another, for instance, normally turns on a variety of contingencies: whether we find we have the necessary talent, for example, or whether technological change makes our training useless. If the community aimed to ensure that our fate in no way depended on how these investment gambles fared—if it guaranteed that we would make the same income whether or not our choice of career turned out to be suited to our tastes or talents—it would end by seriously diminishing our own responsibility for our choices. So any plausible goal of ex post equality would have to draw a distinction between investment and other forms of luck and rule out the former as a ground for redistribution.

Second, ex post equality would be irrational as a general political ideal even if it were restricted to noninvestment luck. Any community that undertook to spend all it could to improve the position of those who had become crippled in an accident, for instance, would have nothing left to spend on anything else, and the lives of all other citizens would be miserable in consequence, because no matter how much the community spent on equipment and personal assistance, the crippled would still be worse off than they were before and the community would be bound to spend even more on them.⑱ That would not reflect anyone’s actual priorities, including the priorities of those who had suffered terrible injury. If the choice had been up to them, they would not have spent everything they had to buy the best possible accident insurance policy before they were injured, because they would not have thought, given the odds, that it made sense to compromise their lives in every other respect to secure the most expensive insurance. That is why ex post equality is irrational.

Some radical egalitarians might think that these are bad arguments against ex post equality because, they might say, they show only that that goal should not be carried to an extreme, that we should insist only on a reasonable degree of ex post equality, a degree that a community could afford without much damaging the institution of investment or without spending too much of the community’s treasure on compensating accident victims. That relaxed formulation of the goal would be politically disastrous for liberals, however, because it would guarantee that the battle over taxes remains confrontational and impressionistic rather than structured. It offers no guidance as to what a reasonable level of ex post equality would be, and so it allows people who demand still lower taxes to declare that the costs of even the meager compensatory programs now in place are excessive because the economic damage they inflict is too great. “Reasonable” ex post equality is an undisciplined standard that leaves great room for hypocrisy and self-deceit and so offers very little protection for the poor, even in a society that embraces it enthusiastically.

In any case, we are trying to establish not only the optimal tax program for a fully just state but the minimally generous program consistent with political legitimacy, and if ex ante equality, which is less generous than full ex post equality, is defensible as an interpretation of equal concern, then we should take ex ante equality to state the minimum goal. But we need some fuller account of what ex ante equality means. It plainly involves social effort on a large front. If some workers face much higher risks of serious accident than others, then ex ante equality would be improved by programs of shop-floor safety that make those risks less unequal, for example. But I shall concentrate on the source of inequality most easily attacked through the tax system: inequality in people’s ability to protect themselves against risk in advance through one or another form of insurance.

Images of Justice

Large-scale political philosophy almost always relies on metaphor and image because a theory of social justice must be animated by some vivid conception of the attitudes people should bring to their collective political and social life. Two great images have dominated theories of economic justice: the metaphor of an imaginary social contract that provides for redistribution from rich to poor and the metaphor of an insurance pool to which all members of the society contribute and from which the needy draw. The social contract image has played a greater role in political philosophy. In the seventeenth century, Thomas Hobbes imagined a social contract to describe a community of strikingly self-concerned individuals who, like business corporations, enter into contracts with one another in order to protect and aggrandize their own self-interest in the longer run. John Rawls used the contract device to a very different effect. He imagined people contracting behind what he called a veil of ignorance so that they do not know where their own distinct self-interest lies; that way of structuring the device expresses, as he explained, a postulated desire to construct fair terms for cooperation among them based on mutual respect. Rawls’s contract fixes an ex post distribution of wealth: the parties agree that the worst-off group in the community will in the end be as well off as possible.

The insurance metaphor has been much less used by political philosophers than the contract metaphor, but it has played a much greater role in practical politics. The politicians of the Fabian movement in Britain, Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal in America, and the social democratic parties of postwar Europe all proposed that the redistributive programs they sponsored, like social security, workmen’s compensation, and poverty relief programs, be understood as vast insurance schemes against accident, sickness, unemployment, and other forms of bad luck. The taxes people pay to finance these programs should be understood, they said, as insurance premiums and the benefits that people receive when they are ill, unemployed, or needy in some other way as insurance benefits. In that way the politicians hoped to claim the virtues of ex ante equality for these programs, because while the contract image attempts to defend ex post equality, the insurance image is committed to equality ex ante.

The contract metaphor is inspired by the old but failed dream of finding some basis for social justice in the hypothetical or assumed consent of all subjects to the reigning political order. The insurance metaphor is more realistic because taxes can indeed be seen as insurance-premium payments and also more instructive because, as we shall see, the level and structure of taxation can be guided by actual insurance markets. It is politically more powerful than the contract metaphor because it resonates in a variety of attractive ways. Describing a redistributive social program as insurance suggests social solidarity; it suggests that the citizens of a political community have reaffirmed their collective identity by pooling the risks they face. It lends the programs an aura of individual prudence and responsibility, because responsible people buy insurance to protect themselves and their families against unforeseen danger. It paints redistributive political programs not as charities bestowing their benefits as acts of grace but rather as matters of entitlement; people are entitled to collect on insurance policies because they have paid for such protection in advance. It reassures the community that its redistributive programs show fiscal discipline; respectable insurance companies are financially sound because the premium and benefit structures of a welldesigned insurance program are in equilibrium. Finally it promises economic rationality for the community as a whole; an insurance scheme in which people are free to choose different levels of insurance allows them intelligently to decide how much of their wealth they should devote to risk management and how much to the rest of their lives.

So it is natural that politicians should find the insurance metaphor an attractive packaging for their programs, and the attraction of the metaphor in turn confirms the appeal of ex ante equality as a political goal. We must now consider, however, whether the metaphor is fraudulent when used in that way. For though the various virtues of efficient insurance schemes that I just described are all indeed realized under certain very artificial circumstances, these are very different from the circumstances in which those social programs operate. Suppose people of roughly equal wealth and vulnerability form a community in which each voluntarily insures along with others in a free and efficient insurance market offering equal insurance to all at the same premium rates. Then a fair and financially efficient version of ex ante equality is indeed created by the individual decisions of people, each in the exercise of his own responsibility for his own life. But if we are to treat the familiar social programs as insurance schemes, we must accept that they deviate from that ideal description in several ways.

First, the redistributive programs are typically not voluntary but mandatory. They are financed either by laws requiring people to insure to a particular level, as when employers are required to provide various forms of insurance for their workers, which means lower wages, or by tax levies that everyone must pay. Second, the citizens of actual political communities are not all of equal wealth and vulnerability: some are poorer than others, and some are more likely than others to suffer the misfortunes that the mandatory insurance schemes cover. Indeed some have already suffered some such misfortune: they have been born crippled in some way or without skills that are prized in the market. In actual insurance markets, people who are more vulnerable to risk pay higher premiums than those less vulnerable. People who have already suffered catastrophes cannot insure against them retrospectively, and insurers do not offer insurance to the poor at lower rates. Under typical redistributive programs, however, those who are more vulnerable to risks do not pay more than those who are less vulnerable, people are covered for misfortunes that befell them before the programs were instituted, and the rich pay whatever taxes finance the programs at higher rates than the poor.

So we must ask whether it is misleading to label these programs insurance schemes or to claim for them the virtues of fairness and efficiency that we associate with ordinary insurance markets. I believe and will now argue that this is not misleading. On the contrary, pursuing the insurance analogy in a systematic and detailed way is the key to constructing a compelling structure for redistributive taxation because the analogy reveals and exploits the most important reason why redistributive taxation is essential to treating citizens with equal concern. The popular intuition that connects insurance to equality is an important insight.

Hypothetical Insurance

I can quickly explain why. As I just said, if well-informed people were equal in their ability to insure against medical and economic disadvantage, and free to make such insurance decisions as they wished in an efficient insurance market, then ex ante equality would be secured even though, as life unfolded for them, these misfortunes fell more heavily on some than others. We therefore fail to achieve a decent level of ex ante equality through ordinary markets for the cardinal reason that people are not equal in their ability to insure. To repeat: there are three main reasons why some people are in a much worse position to secure insurance than others are. First, some people have less money and can therefore afford less insurance. Second, some people are more likely to suffer from specific misfortunes for reasons that insurance companies can discover. People with uncontrolled high blood pressure are more likely to have heart attacks, for instance, and insurers will either charge them more or refuse them insurance altogether. Third (this might be seen as an aspect of the second), the events against which some people might have wanted to insure have already occurred; they are born lacking talents that command high rent in the labor market, for example. These disabilities interact so that people who suffer from one are more likely to suffer from the others as well. We can correct for these ex ante inequalities, however, without the consequences that would make any program of ex post equality illiberal, irrational, and wholly impracticable.

We can correct for them by asking what level of insurance of different kinds we can safely assume that most reasonable people would have bought if the wealth of the community had been equally divided among them and if, though everyone knew the overall odds of different forms of bad luck, no one had any reason to think that he himself had already had that bad luck or had better or worse odds of suffering it than anyone else. That is the question I think decisive for fixing the optimal rates of redistributive tax in any political community. If, knowing what we know about people’s tastes and fears and about what technology is available for treating diseases or alleviating incapacities and at what cost, we are confident that in those hypothetical circumstances almost everyone would, after reflection, purchase at least a given level of insurance against accident, disease, unemployment, or low wage—if we are confident that in most people’s eyes it would be irrational not to purchase such insurance at that level—then we can safely assume that the reason the poor and unlucky in our community did not insure themselves to that level is that ex ante equality is impaired in the ways I just described.⑲

We can design a tax system to correct that unacceptable source of inequality by imagining what the total premium cost would be if everyone in the community bought that level of insurance and then by fixing aggregate annual taxes to provide a sum equal to that aggregate hypothetical insurance premium. By hypothesis, the aggregate premium would produce enough revenue that the community could then provide compensation to those with bad luck in the amount they would have been entitled to have if everyone had bought insurance at that level. That compensation might take the shape of direct transfers—for medical cost reimbursements or unemployment compensation, for instance—or public spending to provide the benefits such people would have insured to have through a single-payer health care system, for example.

That is the general structure I propose for reflecting on and debating fair levels of taxation for our political community.⑳ We can carry the structure into considerable detail by speculating further about the likely insurance market in the hypothetical circumstances of fairness that I imagine: when people have roughly equal wealth and are equally vulnerable to the risks against which they would like to insure. It seems plain, to take one example, that in such a market the premiums people pay would depend on their future income; those who earned more would pay more for the same insurance coverage. Economists use another term, “expected well-being,” that is useful in explaining why. Your expected well-being is calculated by imagining how well or badly off you would be if your life took different courses and then determining your average welfare in these different possible lives, taking into account the likelihood of each. People buy insurance with an eye to their expected well-being; they want to be not too badly off if bad things happen but also not too much worse off if bad things do not happen than they would have been if they had not paid insurance premiums.

We are imagining people buying insurance to protect their well-being if they turn out to have little productive talent, to have bad employment luck, or to suffer serious and expensive illnesses or accidents. Such insurance would be expensive, and buyers would try to keep the real cost of the premiums—the impact of paying the premiums on their expected well-being—as low as possible. Because an extra dollar is much more important to poor people than to rich ones—economists say that money has “declining marginal utility”—people would do this most efficiently by basing their premiums on their actual income so that the percentage of their income they paid in premiums would rise as their income rises, and those who turn out to have lower income would pay substantially less than they would if everyone paid at the same rate. If we modeled our tax structure on the hypothetical insurance story, therefore, we would insist on a fairly steep progressivetax-rate system so that those with more income would pay at a higher rate. Flat-rate tax schemes would be offensive to our ideal of ex ante equality.

Should the main revenue-producing taxes continue to be income taxes? Or should they be consumption taxes that encourage savings, as several economists have recommended? If we did increase the share of revenue raised by consumption taxes, great care would be needed both to keep the aggregate level of taxation as high and the rates as progressive as the hypothetical insurance story requires. A regressive national sales tax, requiring everyone to pay the same tax on purchases, would obviously be illegitimate. There is also the question of estate or inheritance taxes, which are a prominent feature of tax schemes around the world but which Republicans have opposed for a generation by calling them taxes on dying. Nothing is more symbolic of conservative faith in an economic class system than their ambition to eliminate estate taxes altogether.

But some of the conservative objections to the estate tax have merit. It does seem unprincipled to tax an estate at the same rate without regard to the number or wealth of its beneficiaries. It is, moreover, hard to justify a tax on estates on the hypothetical insurance model of ex ante fairness. It would be much fairer, and more consistent with ex ante equality, to treat substantial gifts of any form, including bequests, as income subject to ordinary taxes.㉑ If rates were properly progressive, however, this category of one-time, nonrepeatable income should be subject to special rules, allowing the recipient to amortize the income over several years.

Legitimacy and Counterarguments

I have discussed elsewhere several other important issues about the hypothetical insurance approach and its implications for the details of a working tax structure.㉒ I shall not continue to discuss those details here, but want instead to emphasize my main conclusion: taxes are fair only when they provide at least the minimum we can safely assume that reflective people would have insured to provide for themselves if they were ex ante equal in the way I described. Economists would no doubt disagree as to the best answer to that rather complex counterfactual question; they would disagree about how much of what kinds of insurance it is safe to assume people would have bought in the imagined situation, and therefore about what level of taxation is needed to provide ex ante equality retrospectively. But no one could think that America’s present tax policies are justified on that test. A great many Americans cannot afford even minimal medical care when they are seriously ill; many Americans who are unemployed cannot afford even the most frugal housing or nutrition for themselves and their families. No one could seriously propose that these Americans would not have bought enough insurance for themselves if they had had the same opportunity to buy insurance as their more prosperous or fortunate fellow citizens have, so that they could have had better lives than that.

Earlier in this chapter I distinguished the question of justice from the different question of legitimacy. I asked whether the level of indifference the nation now shows to the fate of its poor calls into question not only the justice of its fiscal policies but also their legitimacy. That depends on whether the government’s policies can be understood as showing equal concern to the poor on at least some plausible account of what equal concern requires. I have now argued that equal concern requires that government aim to achieve ex ante equality among its citizens, that the hypothetical insurance test provides the best account of what ex ante equality requires, and that our present financial policies cannot conceivably be thought to provide that form of equality on that test. So it is urgent that we now ask how those who would defend the government’s economic policies might reply to my argument and whether they can offer any other structure for fixing fair taxes that reflects a different but nevertheless plausible conception of equal concern for all.

Prosperity. The Bush administration claims that low taxes are good for the economy as a whole. As I said, this is a dubious claim that is rejected by many prominent economists. Taxes are significantly lower for the rich than they were in the Clinton administration, and the economic position of most people is worse. The main assumption on which the claim is based—that rich people work harder and are more productive when their taxes are low—is counterintuitive and remains undemonstrated.㉓ But let us suppose, for the sake of the argument, that overall prosperity is indeed improved, all else being equal, when taxes are lower. By itself that shows nothing now pertinent because it does not speak to fairness. A nation that improves overall prosperity by lowering taxes may be like the family I imagined improving the average size of bedrooms by buying a house in which some of the bedrooms are only miserable cupboards. Legitimacy is a matter of equal concern for people, not concern for some abstract statistic.

It has been suggested that in the long run everyone benefits from increased general prosperity because this creates jobs and allows wealth at the top to “trickle down” to everyone. But that claim seems false because even in periods of considerable national prosperity, as in the Clinton administration, the position of the poor did not improve much. It is not even clear that what we call the middle class has benefited from Bush’s tax cuts, and certainly the poor have not benefited. The only clear winners are those who were already rich. It may be that people have a very long run in mind; they mean that we should be thinking not of benefits to be achieved in a few years but over generations. But the longer the run, the less relevant is the hypothesis because, as John Maynard Keynes pointed out, in the very long run we will all be dead. We owe our equal concern to those now alive, not only or even primarily to their and our speculative descendants, whose very identity will anyway depend on how fair to the poor we are now.

Safety Net. So we must try to construct a conservative response that speaks to fairness, not prosperity. Conservatives might object to my argument at a very basic level. They might say that equal concern does not demand even ex ante equality, that it is good enough if the community provides a kind of safety net, a decent life for everyone, without guaranteeing anyone any form or measure of actual equality. It is perhaps a sufficient reply that our present political settlement does not even provide a safety net. It does not prevent many Americans from crashing to what any of us would consider an unacceptable and quite unsafe misery. But the objection is so basic that we should consider its premise: if government satisfies its citizens’ most basic needs, it need not aim at any form of economic equality among them.

In fact, many distinguished philosophers, including liberal philosophers, have questioned whether equality is a proper political goal. We should aim, they say, at a minimal decent standard of life for everyone without taking up the further goal of guaranteeing that everyone’s standard of life be the same. But as that formulation reveals, these philosophers assume that equality means ex post equality. I agree with them and with any conservative who adopts their argument that ex post equality is a dramatically unrealistic and, I would add, unfair goal. The important contrast is between ex ante equality, enforced through something like the insurance device, and some other standard of the minimum we owe everyone out of equal concern. But we cannot draw that contrast or choose between these alternatives without some argument why a lower safety net than the hypothetical insurance story justifies is acceptable, and none has been provided. The insurance device is a safety-net device: it sets a floor. But it is a principled safety net: we can defend it as a legitimate interpretation of what equal concern demands. What argument could fix and justify a lower degree of protection?

The Insurance Device. Conservatives might pitch their objection at a less basic level. They might accept ex ante equality as an ideal but disagree that the hypothetical insurance device is well constructed to serve that ideal. Such arguments might be available, and I would welcome them as contributing to a genuine argument about fair taxation. But I do not know what form they would take and so cannot anticipate them. Or conservatives might accept the hypothetical insurance test but argue that in fact people in the hypothetical situation would buy much less insurance than I assume they would or would reject the progressive premium rate structure I said they would embrace. Once again, I would welcome such arguments but cannot anticipate them.

We Can’t Afford It. Conservatives are more likely to make rather different arguments, however. They might concede that hypothetical insurance would indeed be a fair method of designing taxes but insist that we cannot afford to be fair in that way because spending that much on the poor would bankrupt the community. Or that taking as much from the rich as the insurance argument would justify would mean leveling down to equal misery. These objections are misplaced, however; they show a misunderstanding of ex ante equality and of the insurance device. Ex post equality, if it were ever politically possible to pursue it, would indeed bankrupt the community and would impose equal misery. But the hypothetical insurance device is constructed so as to guarantee that we can afford the kind of equality it justifies.

It asks what portion of their assumed equal wealth people would devote to insurance against future tragedy or disappointment, and no rational person would commit so much to insurance that he could not live a comfortable life if these contingencies did not materialize. That holds for those who turn out rich as well as poor; I have assumed that people would make premiums sensitive to wealth, but they would not agree to premiums so high that they would be reduced to misery by those payments even if they had had economic success. It is said that a high tax policy is unaffordable because the globalization of the economy means that capital would then flee to countries with lower taxes, jeopardizing American jobs. Perhaps that is an argument for levying taxes in a way that makes capital flight more difficult or unlikely—for example, since America taxes citizens on their worldwide income, emphasizing personal income or consumption taxes rather than taxes on business might reduce incentives to locate business abroad.㉔ In any case, the hypothetical insurance exercise takes all such factors into account, because our calculation of the premiums that would be required for any given level of unemployment compensation insurance, for instance, would reflect our assumptions about the impact on economic activity if everyone insured at that level. I am not now arguing, remember, that we should tax ourselves up to the highest level at which we might find it plausible to suppose that people would buy insurance at that level in the hypothetical circumstances. Even then, the objection would be misplaced because, again by hypothesis, we could afford that much in taxation. But I am now arguing only that we must tax ourselves at least to the level below which it would be wholly implausible to suppose people would not insure. The objection that we cannot afford fairness is even sillier against that more modest claim.

Liberty. If taxes continue to be cut, particularly if war and other expenses continue to balloon, the federal government will have less money to spend on a variety of other programs: conservation, safety in the workplace, income support, and Medicare and Medicaid, for example. For liberals, that is a strong argument against tax reductions, but for conservatives it is a strong argument for them. They believe that such programs threaten individual liberty and that low taxes are therefore a good strategy for protecting liberty. Some conservatives express that strategy in a slogan: we must starve the beast, they say—the beast is the federal government—to free ourselves from its tyranny. This suggestion misunderstands the character of liberty as a political value. As I said in chapter 3, no defensible conception of liberty makes government programs like unemployment relief, food stamps, and Medicaid violations of the liberty of the subjects.

The contrary conclusion of some conservatives is rooted in an enthusiasm for states’ rights against the power of the national government. This is not the place to consider whether and how the burden of redistributive taxation should be divided between states and the national government in the United States. I am concerned only with what legitimacy requires of the overall structure of our government. But I can hazard the guess that most of those who want to starve the beast at the federal level would not be enthusiastic about expensive welfare and other redistributive programs more locally. They want to starve all the beasts, great and little, that might take money from them. There may be more to this objection than I see, but it will have to be pointed out to me.

Prior Ownership: It’s Your Money. This is emotionally the most potent of the arguments that conservatives make for low taxes, but it is also the most confused.㉕ The argument begins in the assumption that people are morally entitled to dispose as they think best of what they have earned in investments and salary or what they have inherited. It is their money, and government has no right to take it from them and give it to others. This claim challenges my argument at the deepest possible level because people who accept it can concede that government owes all its citizens equal concern and even that it should therefore work toward reducing ex ante inequality in the nation, and yet insist that government must do that with its own proper resources and not play Robin Hood by stealing from its prosperous citizens and giving their money to the poor. They can even concede that wealthy citizens have a moral obligation of charity: they should voluntarily share what they have with those less fortunate. But it does not follow that government may force them to do what they should; that is a form of tyranny. Anyway, conservatives say, you know better what to do with your money than Washington does, and Washington must respect your decisions.

Even people who embrace this argument accept that government has some responsibilities. It must protect its citizens from crime and foreign enemies, including terrorists, and that is very expensive indeed. So government must raise money to provide the security and other benefits and protections that economists call public goods: goods that benefit everyone, rich and poor alike. But—the conservatives I have in mind say—that does not justify raising funds for the very different purpose of welfare entitlements; these do not benefit everyone alike, and it is wrong to make everyone pay for them. Nor does the public-goods rationale justify making the rich pay more than an equal share for what everyone receives. There might be some case for a flat-rate tax in which everyone pays at the same rate of his income or wealth—and the rich therefore pay more in total—rather than for a poll tax of the kind Prime Minister Thatcher of Britain favored, in which each citizen pays exactly the same amount in taxes for services available to all. A flat-rate tax respects the principle that since the rich have more property to protect from domestic and foreign enemies, they should contribute a higher amount per person by paying at the same rate. But there is no excuse whatsoever for compounding the inequality by asking them to pay for that protection at higher tax rates as well.

This is the heart of the moral case for a flat-rate tax. Since it is your money that the government takes, and since it takes your money without your consent, you should at least pay only for what you get. We must now ask, however, what the ground is supposed to be of my moral entitlement to keeping the money I have been paid in salary or dividends or inherited from my parents. You may say, I am entitled to it because it was my effort and talent that produced it or because people whose money it was decided to give it to me. But what I or they earn from any given expenditure of effort and talent or from any investment luck depends entirely on the political settlement in force when we earned it, so it wholly begs the question to say that I am entitled to a particular political settlement—to one that reduces my taxes, for instance—because it better protects what I have earned or been given. If we changed the political settlement in some important way, I would earn or inherit less or more. We must also reject, for the same reason, the parallel argument that because my contribution to the economy’s success is reflected in my annual salary, I am entitled to keep that salary as my reward for that contribution. My salary measures my contribution only against the background of a particular political settlement; my supposed contribution measured in that way would be less or more if that background settlement were different. So once again it begs the question to suppose that I have “earned” my present salary in order to justify the claim that government should let me keep that salary. If any component of the political settlement, including the tax component, were different, I would have earned a different salary.

So the usual arguments that supposedly demonstrate that pretax income is “my” money are incoherent. The only coherent such argument supposes that the accident of first possession gives rise to a moral entitlement. Our federal income tax system, which is the tax system most Americans have in mind when they argue that taxes should be lower, delays the incidence of taxation in a variety of ways. Most people pay taxes that are taken out of their pay packet before they receive their wages, but these taxes appear as a deduction from a larger sum designated as income on their pay slips. Rich people are permitted to delay paying some of their taxes; they pay them in quarterly installments of estimated tax topped up by a final payment on April 15. In that way they pay out money that has previously been registered as in their possession in a bank account or investment adviser’s report. But these are mere accidents of efficient tax accounting. Taxes can be and are paid in other ways that do not include any earlier registration of wealth possession. Everyone could pay through deductions at source, or through payroll taxes that are paid by employers, and have the effect of lowering the salaries an employer pays without listing any larger sum as the employee’s initial salary. There is no magic in mere first possession, and the fact that a rich person briefly holds the money that he will later pay in taxes in no way argues that he owns that money morally.

The Challenge

The gap between America’s rich and poor seems indefensible. The poor have no adequate health provision; a great many of them have no health provision at all. They lack adequate housing, and their nutrition is terrible. Their children are born with exceptionally bleak prospects for the rest of their lives. It is not possible to think that sensible people would have run the risk of that misery if they did not have to. If my overall argument is right, it follows that the very legitimacy of our political society is now threatened.

That threat can be dissolved only if those who defend conservative tax policies can construct a rival case that shows how these policies can after all be seen as demonstrating equal concern for the poor. I tried to anticipate arguments they might make. But it is their turn now. What case can they make to rescue the legitimacy of what we as a nation have done to our poor? Does political legitimacy not require equal concern? Is ex ante rather than ex post equality the appropriate measure of what equal concern demands? If not, what is the appropriate measure? If so, is the hypothetical insurance strategy not at the heart of any successful account of ex ante equality? Does that strategy not require a substantial increase in the taxes paid for redistributive programs by the richest sections of our community? The conservative culture must take up those questions if we are to regain genuine argument for our politics. Who on that side will begin?   
===============================================================================

➀ See Michael A. Fletcher and Jonathan Weisman, “Bush Renews Push for Extending Tax Cuts,” Washington Post, December 6, 2005, p. A02.

➁ Arthur B. Kennickell, “A Rolling Tide: Changes in the Distribution of Wealth in the U.S., 1989–2001,” table 10 (Levy Economics Institute, November 2003).

➂ http://www.census.gov/hhes/income/histinc/ie3.html.

➃ See “A Marie Antoinette Moment,” International Herald Tribune, January 3, 2006, p. 6.

➄ See Joel Friedman and Robert Greenstein, “Exempting Corporate Dividends from Individual Income Taxes,” Center for Budget and Policy Priorities, January 6, 2003.

➅ See “Wanted: A Wary Audience,” New York Times, January 31, 2006, section A, p. 20.

➆ See “Economy Up, People Down: Declining Earnings Undercut Income Growth,” Economic Policy Institute Publication, http://www.epi.org/content.cfm/webfeatures_econindicators_income20050831.

➇ See “Average American Family Income Declines,” http://abcnews.go.com/Business/wireStory?id=1654810&business=true.

➈ See Council of Economic Advisers, “Strengthening America’s Economy: The President’s Jobs and Growth Proposals,” January 7, 2003.

➉ “Wanted: A Wary Audience.”

⑪ Joseph Stiglitz, “Bush’s Tax Plan—the Dangers,” The New York Review of Books, March 13, 2003.

⑫ See, e.g., Thomas Frank, What’s the Matter with Kansas (Henry Holt, 2004).

⑬ See, e.g., Ian Shapiro, The State of Democratic Theory (Princeton University Press, 2003).

⑭ See the discussion of Rawls in chapter 3 and in Justice in Robes, chapter 9.

⑮ That claim is forcefully argued in Liam Murphy and Thomas Nagel, The Myth of Ownership: Taxes and Justice (Oxford University Press, 2002).

⑯ See Dworkin, Sovereign Virtue, chapters 2 and 3.

⑰ Ibid., chapter 2

⑱ See the discussion ibid., chapters 8 and 9.

⑲ We cannot rule out the possibility that some very few people would not have insured themselves at least to that level. But we do not know which people would not have done so, if indeed any would not, and if the probability is overwhelming that any particular person would have insured at that level, fairness requires us to treat everyone on the
assumption that he would have done so.

⑳ This is a structure, more precisely, for reflecting on what fairness requires in a tax system. Taxes pay for public goods that are not redistributive, and they also serve fiscal policy as well as social justice. The timing of tax reductions and increases must take account of whether the economy as a whole needs stimulation or dampening. Allowing government that leeway for timing is in the interests of everyone, including those at the bottom. But even when fiscal policy argues for reducing taxes, distributive questions remain, and it is not only fair but also efficient that the share of the burden borne by rich taxpayers should then increase, not decrease, as it has under the Bush administration. In fact, whatever fiscal benefit has come from that administration’s tax cuts has come from the moderate tax reductions on the middle class and poor, not from the much more dramatic reductions for the rich.

㉑ See Murphy and Nagel, Myth of Ownership. See also Justine Burley, ed., Dworkin and His Critics (Blackwells, 2004), 353.

㉒ See Sovereign Virtue, especially chapters 2 and 9.

㉓ See, e.g., Jeff Madrick, “Health for Sale,” The New York Review of Books, December 18, 2003: “Claims made by well-known economists such as Martin Feldstein, former chairman of President Reagan’s Council of Economic Advisers, that high taxes discourage people from working hard and investing more have not held up. Clinton’s tax increases in 1992, which Feldstein and others warned would reduce incentives to work and invest, helped or at the least did not impede the economic boom of the late 1990s.” For a similar view from an avowedly right-wing commentator, see Bruce Bartlett, “What Bush Boom?” http://economistsview.typepad.com/economistsview/2006/03/what_bush_boom.html.

㉔ However, there is some evidence that corporations prefer higher taxes and a workforce that is better educated through the educational system that higher taxes make possible. See Paul Krugman’s account of Toyota’s decision to build a new plant in Ontario rather than in the American South, “Toyota, Moving North,” New York Times, July 25,
2005, section A, p. 19.

㉕ See Murphy and Nagel, Myth of Ownership. See also my article “Do Liberty and Equality Conflict,” in Paul Barker, ed., Living as Equals (Oxford University Press, 1996).