Chapter 5 Is Democracy Possible?

Is America Democratic?

I have pressed two main claims in this book. I said, first, that though we appear to be fiercely divided between two political cultures about human rights, religion, and taxes, among many other issues, we have not managed to construct even the beginnings of a decent public argument about these matters. Second, I suggested that we can construct an argument from common ground if we begin way back, at a distinctly philosophical level, in twin principles of human dignity that we almost all accept. But do we have the kind of political system that might accommodate a genuine debate?

No nation’s politics can be run like a philosophy seminar; a democracy must give the final verdict on who leads it to many millions of people who have no training in economics, philosophy, foreign policy, or environmental science and who do not have the time or perhaps the ability to achieve much competence in these disciplines. But our national politics fails the standards of even a decent junior high school debate. Our candidates make us squirm with embarrassment when they clear their throats to speak. They are ruled by consultants who tell them that style is everything and content nothing, that they must say as little as possible except in subliminal codes meant secretly to energize important groups, that a punchy sound bite on the evening news is political gold, that anything remotely resembling an actual argument is death.

So Americans are horribly misinformed and ignorant about the most important issues. Bruce Ackerman and James Fishkin, in their interesting book Deliberation Day, make our hair stand on end.➀ Polls show that just before the 2004 election, half of all Americans thought that Iraqis were among the 9/11 hijackers. At the height of the cold war, a majority of Americans did not know whether Russia was a member of NATO. In 1996 pollsters set out a long list of questions about current events that they deemed critical to the election that year; no more than half the public polled could answer even 40 percent of those questions. Given that level of ignorance, it is inevitable that politicians compete with one another on soap-opera standards. Who looks more confident or calmer? Who talks your language? Which one would you rather date?

The vicious spiral winds down and down. If the political consultants tell the politicians to treat us as ignorant, we will remain ignorant, and so long as we are ignorant, the consultants will tell the politicians to treat us that way. No candidate can afford to jump off that spiral; they all worry that the public is so accustomed to down-market politics that it will punish anyone who disturbs it with a syllogism. Truth as a gold standard has become obsolete: politicians never seek accuracy in describing their own records or their opponents’ positions. They seek the maximal distortion that leaves some tiny fig leaf of truth intact somewhere in the fine print.

We know that money is the curse of our politics. Candidates and political parties collect enormous sums to finance their various electoral campaigns, and this practice corrupts politics and government for several well-rehearsed reasons. Politicians spend grotesquely more effort in raising money than they do on reflecting on policy or principle. Parties made rich by the contributions of great financial interests have an enormous advantage in the competition for votes, and new and poor political organizations are for that reason alone at a usually fatal disadvantage. Large campaign contributors purchase what is euphemistically called “access” to officials; in fact they often purchase not merely access but control. Big money poisons politics in yet another way, moreover, which is less often noticed. It puts enormous sums at the disposal of politicians and their consultants, which makes possible the hugely expensive television and radio campaigns of glitz, slander, and endless repetition of half-truths and pointless factoids that have become the lifeblood of our dumbed-down politics. No candidate can risk sitting out this ugly dance: he who hesitates down-market is lost. In politics money is the enemy not just of fairness but of real argument.

Journalism is supposed to help; journalists are supposed to be indispensable to democracy, the ombudsmen of truth. That is the justification most often given for the special protection of freedom of the press in our Constitution’s First Amendment. But television journalism is what matters now—until the Internet takes over, if it ever does—and television journalism is part of the problem, not the cure. Networks are owned by conglomerates with bottom lines, and news competes with the rest of the schedule for entertainment value. So television trades mainly in sound bites that politicians must compose and repeat endlessly, and its journalistic sister, radio, trades mainly in call-in talk shows aimed at some preselected political group it can tell advertisers to count on. Negative campaigning works, in spite of everyone’s pious hopes that it won’t, simply because negative campaigning is more fun to watch or hear. Rupert Murdoch’s Fox News may not be a new phenomenon—party-line newspapers with no scruples have long been a feature of yellow journalism—but it is new in its scale: a gigantic attack dog with an ultraconservative agenda and a knockout schedule of sports and The Simpsons that captures huge audiences for its shamelessly biased news and current affairs programs.

How bad is all this? We might take one of two views. We might say that whether our politics is satisfactory or unsatisfactory is a matter of taste, and that those who think it very unsatisfactory are likely to be those whose candidates lost the last election. True, some people would relish a more enlightened style of political argument of the kind once found, for example, in Britain. But others think our style is better suited to our national temperament, that through what I persist in calling dumbed-down politics, Americans are uncannily able to choose leaders of quality whose values shine through the kind of politics we have developed better than they would in something more like a university debate. It was widely reported by commentators that Senator Kerry won his 2004 presidential debates with President Bush handily. But in the end Bush impressed the public more with his character than Kerry did with his arguments. Reason isn’t everything, after all, and emotion, of the kind American elections specialize in, has an important place in politics.

That is one, rather sanguine, view we might take. As I said, people who are happy with the results of recent elections might well incline to that view of our politics. Here is the other, very different view: our politics are now so debased that they threaten our standing as a genuine democracy—that they have begun to undermine, that is, the legitimacy of our political order. Is that farfetched? It is common ground among us that democracy is an indispensable form of government. Some of us may question whether it is America’s mission to foster democratic governments in the rest of the world, as President Bush now says it is, but none of us questions the superiority of democracy for us to any other form of government we might have. Indeed none of us questions that, at least for us, a democratic government is the only legitimate form of government, that no other form of government would have moral title to command allegiance over us.

That broad agreement is deceptive, however, because we disagree very much among ourselves—now largely along the familiar red-blue lines—about what democracy really is. Whether we are satisfied with our democracy turns on what we think democracy really is. I shall describe two conceptions of democracy. If we accept one of these, we may think that America is the paradigm of a democratic society and is therefore well placed to lead other nations in that direction. If we accept the other, we must conclude that America falls far short of being a true democracy and that it may not be possible for us to become one. Which of these conceptions of democracy is right? How can partisans of each defend their position to partisans of the other?

What Is Democracy?

The two views of democracy that are in contest are these. According to the majoritarian view, democracy is government by majority will, that is, in accordance with the will of the greatest number of people, expressed in elections with universal or near universal suffrage. There is no guarantee that a majority will decide fairly; its decisions may be unfair to minorities whose interests the majority systematically ignores. If so, then the democracy is unjust but no less democratic for that reason. According to the rival partnership view of democracy, however, democracy means that the people govern themselves each as a full partner in a collective political enterprise so that a majority’s decisions are democratic only when certain further conditions are met that protect the status and interests of each citizen as a full partner in that enterprise. On the partnership view, a community that steadily ignores the interests of some minority or other group is just for that reason not democratic even though it elects officials by impeccably majoritarian means. This is only a very sketchy account of the partnership conception, however. If we find the more familiar majoritarian conception unsatisfactory, we shall have to develop the partnership view in more detail.

The United States is certainly not a pure example of the majoritarian conception of democracy. The framers did not intend it to be because they limited the power of political majorities in various ways: they provided a set of individual constitutional rights, like the right of free speech, as trumps over the majority’s power. So it is no automatic objection to the Supreme Court’s decisions about abortion, for example, that a majority of citizens would reject those decisions. But we might think that the United States should be a majoritarian democracy with only such limitations, by way of individual rights, as our Constitution embodies. Then we could not count the impoverished state of our politics as itself a defeat in that democratic ambition because there is nothing in the majoritarian conception that requires the kind of argumentative political culture that we lack.

The people, after all, are not crying out for more sophisticated political argument; they are busy, they do not mind being entertained, and the great majority of them know what they think anyway. If they thought it important to have better argument, then politicians would at least try harder to supply it. Many more people could watch the public broadcasting networks or C-span if they wished or could read the New York Times or the news pages of the Wall Street Journal. If they prefer to watch Fox News, they are only exercising their democratic right to decide for themselves how to prepare for the franchise. It would be very wrong for government to try to force the public to attend to what apparently bores it. Regulation of that kind would presuppose that individual voters have a democratic responsibility to attend to and try to understand the arguments that appeal to other voters. That assumption is entirely foreign to the majoritarian conception. Perhaps some people do accept some such responsibility, but the democratic verdict is not less legitimate when most do not, because democracy is only about how political opinions are now distributed in the community, not how those opinions came to be formed. So if we adopt the majoritarian view of democracy as the right one, then what I called the sanguine view of our politics is perfectly understandable.

If we aim to be a partnership democracy, on the other hand, the degraded state of our political argument does count as a serious defect in our democracy because mutual attention and respect are the essence of partnership. We do not treat someone with whom we disagree as a partner—we treat him as an enemy or at best as an obstacle—when we make no effort either to understand the force of his contrary views or to develop our own opinions in a way that makes them responsive to his. The partnership model so described seems unattainable now because it is difficult to see how Americans on rival sides of the supposed culture wars could come to treat each other with that mutual respect and attention. That is why, if we decide that the partnership conception is the only defensible account of democracy, we must wonder whether real democracy is now possible in the United States. But partnership democracy is certainly a possible aspiration for us. We can try to move closer to it, if we wish, in ways I shall try to suggest.

Our choice between these two understandings of democracy is crucial for many reasons. The institutions of democracy are often thought to provide a response to criticisms of the kind I have been making against our present government in the last three chapters. In chapter 4, for example, I said that our legitimacy is threatened when we refuse to tax ourselves enough to save our fellow citizens from hopelessly bleak and dangerous lives. If we accept the majoritarian view of democracy, however, then there is an apparently powerful reply to my claim, which is that the American people have endorsed the tax policy that I questioned by reelecting Bush, however narrowly, and that democracy therefore legitimates the policy I condemned. Suppose Congress were suddenly converted by the force of the argument for higher taxes and adopted huge tax increases that it used to fund wonderful redistributive programs. Congress’s behavior would in many ways be admirable, but, so long as it had not first persuaded the majority of people and they still wanted lower taxes, it would in at least one dimension be wrong. Justice might smile on what Congress had done, but if the majoritarian conception is correct, democracy would frown.

That is a pertinent response to my charges only if we do accept that majoritarian conception, however, because on the rival partnership view the response that the majority favors low taxes simply begs the crucial question, which is whether the majority is entitled by the right theory of democracy to treat a minority in that way. That contrast brings out the crucial difference between the two conceptions of democracy. The majoritarian conception purports to be purely procedural and therefore independent of other dimensions of political morality; it allows us to say, as I indicated, that a decision is democratic even if it is very unjust. But the partnership conception does not make democracy independent of the rest of political morality; on that conception we need a theory of equal partnership to decide what is or is not a democratic decision, and we need to consult ideas about justice, equality, and liberty in order to construct such a theory. So on the partnership conception, democracy is a substantive, not a merely procedural, ideal. I said, in chapter 3, that we cannot construct an adequate theory of liberty without relying on other political virtues in our definition. The partnership conception makes a parallel claim about democracy.

That difference might seem to count heavily in favor of the majoritarian conception because that conception allows us to identify a distinct, procedural value of political organization. It allows us to say that a particular political decision—to reduce taxes, for example—at least has the virtue of democratic legitimacy and then ask, as an independent question, whether the decision that has that virtue nevertheless suffers from defects. The majoritarian conception, that is, appears to have the advantage of separating discrete values that the partnership conception fuses together. But that is an advantage only if the bare fact that a majority prefers some policy, just on its own, does provide at least some reason in favor of that policy. If, on the contrary, the bare fact of majority support supplies no reason at all why a community should adopt the policy it supports, even a weak reason that might be overcome by contrary considerations, then the apparent advantage of the majoritarian conception becomes a great disadvantage because that conception would then claim to find some distinct value where there is no value to be found.

So we must choose between the two conceptions by asking whether majority support just on its own does supply some form of moral reason for what the majority supports, and I shall shortly turn to that complex question. First, however, it is worth noticing how quietly our two political cultures, red and blue, now divide in their enthusiasm for one or the other conception. The other divisions I have been discussing—about religion, taxes, and the human rights of suspected terrorists—are explicit and noisy. This division is not: there are no banners proclaiming for the majoritarian or partnership conception of democracy. That is because most people’s views about the character of true democracy are governed by their sense of which kind of democracy is more likely to produce the substantive political decisions they prefer. Just now conservatives appeal more to the rhetoric of majoritarianism, and liberals more to that of partnership, but these positions were often reversed in the past and may be reversed again. Conservatives who are hostile to redrawing electoral districts so as to give more political power to historical minorities appeal to a majoritarian conception, for example. They say that any effort to give one group more power per member than it would have on a more random or color-blind districting is offensive to democracy. Liberals who support racial districting favor a partnership conception because this recommends arrangements that improve the status of historically embattled minorities as full democratic partners.

In recent decades the main battles about the nature of democracy have been fought over judges and over the Supreme Court’s authority to declare acts of other branches of government unconstitutional. The American Constitution limits the power of political majorities by recognizing individual constitutional rights that majorities may not infringe. Conservatives accuse judges of inventing new rights and reading them into the Constitution as a means of substituting their own personal values for those of the majority. We noticed, in chapter 3, some of the past judicial decisions that conservatives particularly hate: the Supreme Court’s school prayer, abortion, and homosexual rights decisions, for example. Conservatives say that allowing judges to make those fundamental decisions is undemocratic because it denies the majority the right and power to make fundamental moral decisions for itself. Liberals, on the contrary, have over the last half-century mainly applauded the role and decisions of the so-called activist judges because they approve the decisions that outrage conservatives. They think that the decisions that expanded individual rights enhanced rather than savaged our democracy, and that view presupposes the partnership conception. It is no objection, for liberals, that the judges who make these decisions cannot be thrown out by the people because according to the partnership conception the majority is entitled to its will only when the conditions of full partnership are met, and liberals think that the controversial constitutional decisions helped to ensure that the conditions are met.

Judges can outrage conservatives in other ways as well, as became plain in the drama about Terri Schiavo, the young woman I mentioned in chapter 3 who had been in a persistent vegetative state for fifteen years when a Florida state court judge, on the application of Mrs. Schiavo’s husband, ordered the feeding tubes that kept her alive withdrawn. The conservative Congress passed emergency legislation purporting to give federal judges power to review that decision and to order the feeding tubes restored pending their decision. The federal judge who was assigned the case by lot refused to order the tubes restored or to overrule the Florida court. The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals, a court generally regarded as very conservative, quickly upheld the federal judge’s ruling, and the Supreme Court as quickly refused to intervene. Prominent Republicans then announced themselves outraged at what they took to be the insubordination of all these judges. Once Congress had made its will known, they said, it was the duty of judges to execute that will because Congress is elected by and represents the majority of the people. Tom DeLay, then the majority leader of the House, declared that the judges should be impeached for that subordination, and though other Republicans dissociated themselves from his inflammatory remarks, it became plain that they too assumed that the will of the people expressed through Congress was supreme and brooked no judicial opposition. Liberals were in turn outraged by the Republican reaction; they said that the Republicans were rejecting the independence of the judiciary and the rule of law. Disagreement about the nature of democracy shone through this confrontation. Conservatives assumed and liberals denied the greater democratic legitimacy of the legislative to the judicial branch of government, a claim presupposed by any consistent version of the majoritarian conception of democracy.

Judges are also at the center of another recent and important constitutional drama, but this time it is the method of appointing them, not their powers once they are appointed, that is in dispute. Republicans now control the Senate, but they fall short of the sixty votes they need to break a filibuster, that is, to close off debate on any issue. In his first term President Bush ignored the advice of Democratic leaders in the Senate to consult with them in advance of judicial nominations in order to avoid bruising confirmation battles. Instead, with no consultation, he nominated a raft of ultraconservative judges designed to please only his ultraright-wing power base. The Senate Democrats successfully used filibusters to block a few of the nominees they deemed particularly unqualified. Republican leaders then threatened to amend the Senate rules to abolish the possibility of filibuster in considering judicial nominations so that the Republican majority could confirm all of Bush’s rejected nominees, no matter how reactionary or unqualified. Fourteen influential senators, seven from each party, agreed to a compromise that shelved that plan, at least temporarily, in return for Democrats’ agreement not to filibuster against confirming some judges Bush had nominated. But the compromise was drafted in vague terms and may collapse at any time.

The Republican leadership said that a filibuster is undemocratic because it allows a minority of forty-one senators to thwart the will of the Senate majority by refusing to bring a nomination to a final vote. Their argument appeals to the majoritarian conception of democracy. In fact their argument is weak even if we accept that conception because the Senate is a nonmajoritarian body. Each state elects two senators, no matter how big or small its population, and the Democratic senators, though fewer in number, in fact now represent more people than the larger number of Republican senators do. But plainly it is the majoritarian conception that the Republicans have in mind when they call filibusters undemocratic. The Democrats who defend the filibuster—and moderate Republicans who are nervous about destroying that technique because they know that one day they will be in the minority—appeal to the spirit of the partnership conception to justify their position. They say that the Senate exists as a chamber of reflection, that it is designed to protect minorities against hasty majoritarian legislation, and that the filibuster has served that purpose well by requiring the majority party not simply to ride roughshod over the fundamental interests the minority party believes it must protect.

As I said, people’s opinions about the nature of democracy are likely to be driven by what they believe to be the best means of realizing their other political goals. Political enthusiasms for judicial activism were very different in the early twentieth century, when an economically conservative Supreme Court was declaring progressive social legislation unconstitutional. Conservatives then appealed to something at least like the partnership conception to insist that respect for private property is indispensable to true democracy, and liberals embraced a majoritarian conception to denounce the Court’s interference with social progress. In recent years conservative judges and Supreme Court justices have once again become active in striking down congressional legislation in order to increase the power of states to make their own decisions about whether, for example, handguns can legally be sold near public schools. Liberals are therefore beginning to rediscover the supposed virtues of the majoritarian conception of democracy. Liberals hated the filibuster when southern Democrats used it in the mid-twentieth century to thwart civil rights legislation, and they may come to hate it again if some unforeseen change in American politics catapults them back into power again. But the choice between the two visions of democracy will remain crucial to political morality no matter how the politics of the choice shift. It is crucial because the question I posed at the beginning of this chapter—whether the embarrassing state of our political discourse damages our democratic credentials—turns on how we choose.

Is There Any Value in Majority Rule?

Nothing is more familiar than the principle of majority vote. It is very common for people to assume that if a group is cast together in some project and must make collective decisions about matters on which they disagree, then the right procedure is to vote with each member of the group having a single vote and the verdict falling on the decision that attracts the most votes. The reasons for the wide appeal of this idea are unclear, however. If the principle of majority rule is a matter of basic and innate fairness applicable across all contexts of decision, that argues very strongly for the majoritarian conception of democracy. Any other version of democratic procedures would cheat some people—those who are in the majority on some important issue—of what they are in all fairness entitled to have. If, however, the majority rule principle is fair only once certain prior conditions of association are met, then that might argue for the partnership conception, which liberals, at least now, seem to favor.

In fact, it is a serious mistake to think that a majority vote is always the appropriate method of collective decision whenever a group disagrees about what its members should do. Suppose passengers are trapped in a lifeboat on the high seas that will sink unless one person—any person—jumps or is thrown overboard. How shall the group decide who is to be sacrificed? It seems perfectly fair to draw straws or in some other way to let fate decide. That gives each person the same chance of staying alive. Letting the group vote, however, seems a very bad idea because kinship, friendships, enmities, jealousies, and other forces that should not make a difference will then be decisive. We use lotteries to make some fateful political decisions as well. When we draft soldiers, we do not hold referendums on who should be drafted. We choose by lot. Perhaps we should make more use of chance in politics. The Athenians selected their leaders by lot, and it is not vividly clear that the quality of our legislators would decline if we chose them in the same way.

In some circumstances a group disagrees not just about how its members should act but about whether a group decision on the matter at issue is necessary at all. Suppose the question arises in some group whether consensual sexual relations are immoral outside marriage. Some members might think that a collective decision on that matter is desirable so that those who flout the majority’s opinion may be punished in some way. But others deny that a collective decision is appropriate; they believe people should decide for themselves. It would beg the question against the latter opinion to hold a vote to decide whether a collective decision is appropriate. If the latter opinion is right, allowing the majority to decide even that question would be unfair.

So majority rule is by no means always an appropriate decision-making procedure. Now consider a very different suggestion. Majority rule is appropriate in politics not because it is the only fair method but for the more practical reason that majority rule results in wiser and better government. There is a venerable formal version of that argument, developed by the great mathematician Condorcet. He demonstrated that if we assume that each member of a group, on his or her own, is more than 50 percent likely to have the right answer about some question under consideration, then the group maximizes the chance that it will reach the right answer by insisting on the answer that attracts the most votes. But we have absolutely no right to that assumption when the issues are fundamental moral ones. On the contrary, we all believe that many more people have been wrong about these moral issues, over history and indeed across the world now, than have been right. It would be intolerable hubris to think that Americans are more likely to be right than other human beings have been or are, particularly when Americans are divided so evenly and fiercely as they are now.

Here is a less mathematical but more plausible version of the practical argument for majority rule. We must choose our leaders and our policies by majority vote because we want our leaders to pursue the common good rather than private interests, and which policies are in fact in the common good is a matter of how many people the policies benefit. Whether the common good requires more basketball courts or music halls depends on how many people want one or the other. So the best way to ensure that legislators know where the common good lies, and will work toward it, is to allow the majority in each district to choose the representatives it wants. That is a very popular argument for the efficiency of majoritarian government, and it would be a powerful argument if all political issues were on a par with the choice between basketball courts and music halls. But of course they are not; the questions we have been discussing in this book turn on deep moral issues, not strategies about how to please most people.

So we cannot assume either that majority vote is the uniquely fair way of reaching collective decisions whenever people disagree or that it is always the most accurate or efficient way of making those decisions. But can we say at least this: when a collective political decision must be made and when leaving that decision to chance would seem irrational, then majority rule is the only fair method of decision? We might say: it is uniquely fair then because it allows each person the same influence over the decisions that affect him as anyone else has. That suggestion might make some minimal sense if government were all by town meeting or electronic referendum. But in representative government, people’s influence over political decisions is for a thousand reasons never equal; on the contrary, it must be strikingly unequal. At any given moment many thousands of people enjoy elective and appointive office, and the political power of even the lowliest of these will be much greater than most of their fellow citizens who remain in private life. It is no answer to say that all citizens have in the end influence equal to the president’s because he, like they, will have only one vote in deciding who wins the next election. That is preposterous; the president and his appointees are given awesome power for several years, and you and I have next to no power to hinder them. Conservatives say that our system of judicial review is undemocratic because the power of five justices trumps that of a majority of the people. But—as Bush’s first term showed so dramatically—much of what a single president can do on his own in a single term can never be undone and may be much more consequential, for better or worse, than what all the Supreme Court justices have done together over our whole history.

Representative government is only the most dramatic of the ways in which a very few of us come to have vastly more political power than all the rest even when votes are nominally equal. Political power also very much differs because some of us are much richer than others, or more persuasive in discussion, or have more friends or a larger family, or live in states where the two great political parties are more evenly divided than where others live so that our votes are marginally more likely to make a real difference. These are all familiar reasons why the idea of equal political power is a myth. It is not even an attractive myth because we would not want a Martin Luther King Jr. to have only the political influence that you and I do. Indeed, when we remember how vanishingly little political power most of us can have anyway in national or even state political decisions, the question of numerical equality in that infinitesimal quantity of power seems wholly unimportant.

Elsewhere I have suggested a metric for identifying a particular person’s political power.➁ Suppose we know nothing about anyone’s opinion on some matter of political controversy, and then we learn your opinion and how you will vote when the time for voting comes. By how great an amount does just this information improve the odds—what philosophers call the subjective probability—that your opinion will prevail? If the issue is a national one—whether inheritance taxes are to be reduced, for instance—we would need a great many zeros after the decimal point to express the increased subjective probability. Suppose instead that the issue is whether homosexuality may be criminalized and that issue is to be decided by the Supreme Court. Once again, learning your opinion alone would shift the subjective probabilities because public opinion has some influence on who is appointed to the Court and on how justices decide. Once again, the shift would be infinitesimal, however, and—this is the crucial point—we have no way of knowing in advance whether the shift would be less in the latter case, when the issue is reserved to the courts, than in the former, when it falls to majoritarian politics. The majoritarian conception of democracy, which condemns leaving such issues to the courts, cannot rely on any principle about equal political power to justify its position.

So we must abandon the familiar idea that majority rule is a uniquely fair decision-making procedure, even in politics. In some circumstances, as in the lifeboat and draft cases, it seems highly unfair, and in others, when the question is whether there should be a collective decision on some matter at all, it begs the question. Majority rule is not a particularly sound method of reaching the truth, moreover, and it does not come close to securing equality of political power in a large political community with representative political institutions. We are therefore forced to an important conclusion. The majoritarian conception of democracy is defective because it cannot explain, on its own, what is good about democracy. Mere weight of numbers, on its own, contributes nothing of value to a political decision. We need a deeper and more elaborate account that tells us what conditions must be met and protected in a political community before majority rule is appropriate for that community.

Partnership Democracy: A Rough Sketch

We should return for that purpose to the conception of human dignity that I have been citing and celebrating throughout this book. In the last three chapters I set out my own views about the substantive implications of the two principles of dignity for our policies about human rights, the role of religion in government, and taxation. I offer these opinions as the basis for a contemporary restatement of the liberal position. But of course other Americans who accept these two principles in the abstract will continue to disagree with me and with each other about these implications. So we also need to think about the right procedures for reaching collective decisions when our disagreements persist. We need, that is, to consider not just the substantive but also the procedural implications of the two principles. What structure of political institutions, and of elections to fill those institutions with officials, do those principles recommend?

Equal Concern. Most of us accept this consequence of the first principle of human dignity: a political community must show equal concern for the lives of all those who live within its borders. So we must do our best to ensure that our political officials act with equal concern for all rather than special concern for only some, and that is best achieved with widespread and roughly equal suffrage. Officials elected by a broad swath of the population will do a much better job of protecting the weak against special privilege and tyranny than officials elected by and responsible to only a few. That consequentialist justification for wide suffrage provides no reason, however, for any fetish of mathematical exactness in making people’s votes equal in their impact. On the contrary, tinkering and variation may allow for greater representative efficiency and may improve the chances that the final legislative results will better reflect equal concern for all—for example, by consolidating the power of politically isolated minorities. Nor does that justification provide any reason at all for permitting majorities, whenever they wish, to change the basic constitutional structure that seems best calculated to ensure equal concern. We may better protect equal concern by embedding certain individual rights in a constitution that is to be interpreted by judges rather than by elected representatives, and then providing that the constitution can be amended only by supermajorities.

This consequentialist justification of the constitutional structure of the United States does not permit any deep or firm distinction between procedural and substantive fairness. It does not imagine, as supporters of the majoritarian conception do, that there can be any fundamental conflict between the political arrangements that respect equality in the distribution of political power and the legislative policies that respect equality in the distribution of resources and opportunities. On the contrary, this justification supposes that the correct test of whether a political arrangement shows genuine procedural equality is to ask whether that arrangement is likely to produce policies that respect substantive equality in concern for people’s lives. But I must now insist on one further principle of great importance that is not captured in that consequentialist justification. We can tinker with districting and other representative arrangements, like filibusters and assigning two senators to each state, large or small, in the hope of perfecting the equal concern that our politics show. But we cannot diminish any citizen’s political power by denying him an equal vote for any reason that expresses any measure of contempt for him or any lack of concern for his fate. That would be the most blatant and symbolically outrageous possible violation of the democratic conception of human dignity.

Self-government. Now we must consider this consequence of the second principle of human dignity: political arrangements must respect people’s personal responsibility for identifying value in their own lives. I just argued that a majority has no general or automatic right to impose its will on a minority. Under what circumstances does it have that right? In chapter 4 and just now I said that equal concern is a necessary condition of political legitimacy. But it cannot be a sufficient condition, on its own, because people have no moral right to assume coercive authority over others, even when they act in those other people’s interest. That would be a flat violation of the second principle of dignity. Democracy is said to be an effective answer to that objection because democracy means self-government: it is the form of government in which the people govern themselves. That answer supposes that though it would compromise my dignity to submit myself to the authority of others when I play no part in their decisions, my dignity is not compromised when I do take part, as an equal partner, in those decisions.

That is a crucially important assumption. It explains, if anything can explain, why democratic government is legitimate. It is also the nerve of the partnership conception of democracy; we must ask, in constructing that conception, what rights must be reserved to an individual citizen if submitting to the will of the majority of his fellow citizens in other circumstances is to be consistent with his dignity. The right to participate in political decision, as a voter and as eligible for political office, is obviously essential. So, as we have several times seen, is the equal concern by the majority for his fate. I discussed another crucial condition in chapter 3. It is inconsistent with someone’s dignity ever to submit to the coercive authority of others in deciding what role religious or comparable ethical values should play in his life, so the partnership conception requires some guarantee that the majority will not impose its will in these matters. On the partnership conception, therefore, constitutional rights protecting an individual’s freedom to make ethical choices for himself are not compromises of democracy but rather attempts to guarantee it.

This brief sketch of the partnership conception fits the basic structure of our own constitutional system very well. It fits that basic structure better than the rival majoritarian conception does because, as I said in distinguishing the two conceptions, our government is not and was not intended to be fully majoritarian. We have representative government, near-universal adult suffrage, and reasonably frequent elections. But we do not insist on mathematical equality of impact in those elections, and some of our legislative institutions, like the Senate and the filibuster, qualify rather than enforce a majoritarian principle. We do insist that no one’s vote be denied or compromised for reasons that are inconsistent with recognizing his equal importance and his own responsibility for his life. We embed fundamental freedoms in our Constitution, and we give judges the power to enforce those rights even against a majority’s will. In these ways our major institutions provide a framework within which we could construct a full-partnership democracy if we had the political will to do so.

But we do not have a partnership democracy now. In chapter 4 I argued that our laws do not show equal concern for our poor; our failure is so manifest that it compromises our claim to democratic legitimacy. We fall short of a full-partnership democracy in other ways as well: many black and other minority Americans still live as second-class citizens effectively disenfranchised by prejudice and stereotype. The subject of this chapter is not these forms of substantive failure, however. It is the failure of even our electoral procedures, the processes through which we elect our officials, to satisfy the basic requirements of genuine democracy. Public political discourse must have a decent argumentative texture if we are to treat it as an exchange between mutually respectful partners who disagree. Our degraded politics are not only insulting and depressing; they are not even democratic. That is in some ways our most consequential failure because we might hope that we would do better in other ways if our politics were of higher quality.

What Can We Do? First, Education

In previous chapters I tried to illustrate the principles of human dignity I have been exploring through concrete proposals that reflect a liberal interpretation of those principles. In chapter 2 I proposed an approach to the detention of suspected terrorists grounded in a new conception of human rights; in chapter 3 I described how a tolerant secular society would treat its citizens’ desire and need for religious expression; in chapter 4 I constructed a model for a redistributive tax program that shows equal concern for all members of the community. I regard these proposals only as illustrations, of course, not as furnishing anything like a complete political program. I shall now offer some further proposals, in the same spirit, to illustrate the distinct procedural claims I have defended in this chapter.

Scholars and other commentators know how bad our politics are, and a great variety of thoughtful proposals have been made for improving them. I mentioned earlier, for example, a book by Ackerman and Fishkin that recommends creating just before each national election a new national holiday called Deliberation Day, during which voters could attend meetings to discuss the election with one another if they wish. We might be skeptical about how many people would wish to spend their new holiday in that way, but every suggestion should be explored. I offer now some more radical proposals, however, which are even less likely to be realized anytime soon but which we would do well to bring into the fringes, at least, of political discussion as soon as possible. When you read these proposals, you might be reminded of the old story about the New England farmer who was asked by strangers how to get to Boston from his farm. “If I were going there,” he said, “I wouldn’t start from here.” But we are here, alas, and we must not abandon hope of getting to a better place.

We should contemplate, among others, three important kinds of change: in education, in the way we run our elections, and in the way we interpret our Constitution. Educational changes would be the most effective and the least disruptive to tradition if we could only achieve them. The difficulties, however, are famously great. Just before the 2004 election, a medical technician saw a copy of The New York Review of Books on my table and said he assumed that meant I would vote for Kerry. He would not, he said, and he explained why. He knew the issues were complex; he knew that many educated people thought that the treatment of our prisoners in Guantánamo and elsewhere was unjust, for example, and also thought that Bush’s tax reductions were economically very unwise. But he knew that other people who also thought themselves experts disagreed with all those judgments, and he was wholly without the ability to judge these matters for himself. So he would vote for Bush because he was religious and knew that Bush was religious too. What else, he asked me, could he do?

We must no longer tolerate secondary school education that puts so many thoughtful voters in that impossible and undemocratic position. The most daunting but also most urgent requirement is to make a Contemporary Politics course part of every high school curriculum. I do not mean civics lessons in which students are taught the structure of our government or history courses in which America’s story is celebrated. I mean courses that take up issues that are among the most contentious political controversies of the day: issues like those discussed in this book. The dominant pedagogical aim must be to instill some sense of the complexity of these issues, some understanding of positions different from those the students are likely to find at home or among friends, and some idea of what a conscientious and respectful argument over these issues might be like. The dominant pedagogical strategy should be an attempt to locate these controversies in different interpretations of principles the students might be expected themselves to accept: for example, the two principles of human dignity that I believe are common ground in America now. The courses might well include a suitably simplified examination of classics of Western political philosophy from both the conservative and liberal traditions: some understanding of the ideas of Aquinas, Locke, Kant, Rawls, and Hayek, for example, mainly through secondary sources if necessary. The materials and teaching must be geared to the abilities of high school students, of course, but I believe that we are more likely to underestimate than overestimate those abilities. People who can master the intricacies of peer-to-peer file sharing through the Internet should have no trouble with the Categorical Imperative; indeed some study of the latter might help them in deciding whether the former is fair.

Contemporary Politics courses would be extremely challenging and difficult to teach, particularly before some broad consensus had developed among teachers and in schools about how they should be taught. Teachers would have to steer between anodyne banality and indoctrination, and they would have to recognize that the first of these failures is as much to be avoided as the second. But think how much it would improve our politics if students leaving high school had some understanding of the reasons why a deeply devout person might nevertheless prefer a tolerant secular to a tolerant religious state or why an atheist might think that public celebrations of religion were appropriate in a nation the vast majority of whose members were religious. Or if those students had asked themselves whether their nation had an obligation of equal concern to all its citizens and what, if any, were the implications of that obligation for redistributive taxation and social welfare programs. Or if they had been asked to consider what differences were morally permissible in a state’s treatment of citizens and aliens. Or if they had actually read and debated the opinion of Justice Marshall in the Massachusetts gay marriage case and, if they disagreed with her judgment, they had been challenged to say why. Or if they had been invited to consider what made a theory scientific and whether the “intelligent design” theory of creation met whatever standard for classification as science they considered appropriate.

I know, of course, that this suggestion bristles with possibly insuperable political difficulties. The selection of texts would be intensely controversial, and the danger of manipulation by local political and religious groups very great indeed. It would be much easier for everyone—school boards, school principals, and teachers in particular—if nothing like this were attempted. But that would nevertheless be shaming. We cheat our children inexcusably if we allow the nation to continue only to masquerade as democratic. The idea that public education is school for democracy is certainly not new; it was at the center of John Dewey’s enormously influential educational philosophy. What is new in this suggestion is only content and ambition, and that is driven only by a more realistic opinion of what genuine democracy needs and the cost we pay in legitimacy so long as we fail to provide it.

Elections

We must also change how we elect our leaders. Election law—the regulation of political financing, campaigns, representation, and voting procedures—is an elaborate and growing branch of legal theory. I shall suggest, by way of illustration only, some radical directions that that law might now take. I have not tried to elaborate my proposals in any detail or to consider either the practical or the political obstacles to implementing them. Most of those obstacles are obvious enough. Nor have I tried to confront certain evident problems of detail that each proposal raises, including the treatment of third- or minor-party candidates. I set these proposals out in this rough form mainly to consider whether the natural objections they inevitably attract are plausible. Mental blocks are among the most powerful obstacles to new directions. Consider then the follow illustrative proposals.

Public Election Channels. Congress should create and fund two special public broadcasting channels to offer continuous election coverage during each presidential election period. These networks should be subject to severe equal-time and fairness coverage restrictions but should be otherwise free to develop their own news programs, bulletins, talk shows, and analyses. Presidential candidates would be required to hold regularly scheduled press conferences that are broadcast and organized by these public networks, and extensive follow-up questioning would be permitted at these news conferences. Election debates would be organized by and broadcast on these public networks, and the rules of those debates would be established by legislation not subject to variation by candidate agreement. A bipartisan election channel commission with deans of prominent journalism schools as ex-officio members would appoint the officers of these networks and have broad powers to supervise fairness and equal-time standards.

Regulation of Private Networks and Affiliates. Overall television and radio expenditure by or on behalf of any candidate should be strictly limited without regard to the source of his funds. Political commercials in the familiar form should be forbidden on all networks except subject to the following regulations: the advertisement must run for a minimum of three minutes, of which at least two minutes must consist in a candidate for office or an officer of an organization that has paid for the advertisement speaking directly to the camera.

Right of Comment. During a presidential election period, each of the major terrestrial and cable networks should be required to set aside a prime-time slot of half an hour each week, to be made available to each of the major parties to correct what it takes to be errors or bias in that network’s reporting and political opinion broadcasts during the preceding week. The parties would be required to submit advance tapes of the proposed material, and though the network would be required to broadcast the material as presented, it would be permitted to prepare a rebuttal if it wished.

Lawyers will tell you that these suggestions have one thing in common: they are all unconstitutional because they are violations of our Constitution’s First Amendment guarantees of freedom of speech. I would contest that, as a legal opinion, at least as to some of these sample suggestions. I believe that some of the Supreme Court’s decisions applying First Amendment principles to election law, including its well-known and much regretted decision holding that limits on campaign expenditure are unconstitutional, were wrong when decided and remain wrong.➂ But my immediate concern is not with constitutional law but with political principle. Free speech is not just a clause in our constitutional document; it is an important human right now recognized in similar national and international documents around the world. Would the moral and political principles behind the First Amendment, the principles that justify giving that particular freedom that constitutional status, be outraged by regulations of election speech of the kind I am imagining?

We must now ask the question about the right of free speech that I asked in chapter 3 about the companion right of religious freedom. What more basic principles or policies justify protecting speech in that special way? There is an extensive literature among constitutional scholars and political philosophers devoted to that question, and much of it makes the important point that there is no single answer. Freedom of speech serves a considerable variety of important principles and policies. But two of these are most in point in our discussion now. First, freedom of speech is a crucial part of the rights people must have to protect their personal responsibility under the second principle of human dignity: the responsibility to identify and seek value in their own lives. Second, that freedom is a crucially important condition for the realization of any plausible conception of democracy: it is plainly essential to the partnership conception that I said we should favor. We must therefore ask whether the radical changes in election law that I propose would compromise either of these fundamental reasons for protecting speech.

Preventing someone from speaking his conscience and conviction to other people is a particularly grave harm. People develop their ethical and moral personalities most effectively in conversation and exchange with others. Speaking out for what one believes—bearing witness and testimony—is in any case for most people an essential part of believing; it is part of the total phenomenon of conviction. Identifying oneself to others as a person of particular beliefs or faiths is part of creating one’s identity, part of the process of self-creation that is at the center of our personal responsibility. Silencing someone’s political speech is a particularly devastating insult because it denies his role as a full partner in self-government. So we should be particularly attentive to the danger of regulating political speech in any way.

But we should not be bewitched by that danger; we should look more closely at the effects of the particular regulation that is proposed. There is no risk to a political candidate’s personality or to his success in identifying his convictions to others in requiring him to speak for himself on television during the election period rather than through an actor and to describe and defend his convictions rather than simply smiling through jingles. These constraints in no way compromise his authenticity or sincerity; they can only improve those qualities by making distortion and evasion more difficult. There is no threat to the ethical or moral integrity of a network’s chief executive officer or to any of its corporate owners or shareholders when the network is required to broadcast comments on its election coverage plainly labeled as representing the opinions of others not its own. These regulations may be costly. The money that networks would lose by forgoing political commercials and by sacrificing prime-time slots for political rebuttals would be considerable, and a public subsidy to cover these costs might be appropriate. But that is another matter, and it has nothing to do with freedom of speech. We do not think that anyone’s integrity of personality is threatened by laws forbidding cigarette or liquor advertising on television or by requiring advertisements for medicine to be vetted for accuracy. The damage that our politics now does to democracy is as grave as the damage to health carried by that forbidden advertising.

The second reason for protecting freedom of speech that I mentioned is equally important. People do not govern themselves if they are deprived of the information they need to make intelligent decisions or cheated of the criticism they need in order effectively to judge the record of their officials. But the regulations I propose have no such consequence. On the contrary, they are designed to improve the public’s chances of receiving the information it requires in a form that is more helpful because it is less distorted and obfuscated. It is true that many people would find the kind of television politics the proposed regulations would create less to their tastes. They might well prefer mindless personal attacks set to catchy political tunes to a three-minute argument about political economy. If we were drawn to the majoritarian conception of democracy, we might count that a serious objection. We might think that people are entitled to as much choice as possible in how they wanted their politics presented. But on the partnership conception, too much is at stake for that. If the fairness of an election depends on the character of the argument that precedes the vote, then people have no democratic right that their politics be wrapped in entertainment.

Constitutional Law and the Commander in Chief

This chapter has been about the procedures of democracy: I have argued that we must reject the familiar majoritarian understanding of democracy. Majoritarianism seems appealing because it separates procedure from substance, focusing on how people who disagree about substance can nevertheless agree how fairly to resolve their differences. But that apparent advantage disappears once we realize that majority rule has no independent virtues of fairness, that its claims to fairness arise only when certain substantive conditions have already been identified and satisfied. Philosophers have long wanted a purely procedural account of political fairness, but there is none to be had.

So I have been talking about democracy in this book all along. The basic ethical principles of human dignity that I described in chapter 1 are the source of democratic values. The freedom I identified in our discussion of church and state in chapter 3 must be protected if we are to have democracy. So must the equal concern that I discussed in chapter 4. I agree that it would be neater firmly to separate these substantive issues from procedural questions about democracy, but political values are finally unitary, not plural. Earlier in this chapter I imagined a response to the preceding chapters: that my criticisms might be answered by pointing out that the American people apparently approve, even if only just barely, of how our government is governing. But that, as we have now discovered, is a wholly futile response, for if the Bush administration’s programs are wrong in the way I charge, popular consent cannot cure them.

Throughout the book my focus has been on political principle rather than on constitutional or international law. But I shall end by saying something about our Constitution because it is one of America’s greatest political advantages, an advantage that a great many other nations are now doing their best to secure for themselves. The Constitution not only protects individual rights but does so in highly abstract terms that allow lawyers and laymen to conduct a continuing argument about how best to interpret its principles. We have encountered the Constitution’s abstract vocabulary in each chapter: I have mentioned due process and the equal protection of the laws, freedom of speech, the free exercise of religion, the prohibition on any establishment of religion. For better or for worse, these now runic phrases have built theaters for legal theory and political philosophy. The protection they offer is far from perfect; the runic language is after all antique and was not deployed with contemporary problems in mind. The Supreme Court has the last word, for practical purposes, about how the language should be interpreted, and its record is stained with serious error at almost every period of its jurisprudence. We all worry, red and blue alike, about the direction the Court will take in the future, and though it is worth noticing that most of the past decisions we now most regret were decisions in which the Court refused to overturn unlawful executive or legislative decisions, we must concede that it has also made mistakes in the opposite direction, overruling other branches of government when it should not have done so.

Still, the Constitution gives us an opportunity for a kind and dimension of public argument that we would otherwise lack. It allows us to conduct an important part of the argument I said we need in the disciplined language of legal and hence political principle. Several of the issues I have been discussing in this book have been argued in that way—courtrooms have been the prime forums for such debate as we have had about religion in our politics and public life, for instance—not just among professional lawyers but also to the public at large in newspapers and popular journals. We have only just begun a constitutional legal debate about the issues I raised in chapter 2, about whether and how far, in our attempts to defend ourselves against further terrorist attacks, we may abandon the protections of individuals that we have thought essential to human dignity. That may prove, however, to be among the most important debates we have ever had. The Bush administration claims unprecedented authority to act free of a variety of legal constraints when it deems this necessary in our defense. It has claimed the power to torture its prisoners, and to order their “rendition” to other countries that will torture them, in spite of laws flatly forbidding torture. It has claimed the power secretly to tap telephone calls not just between foreigners but between Americans as well—with no judicial warrant or congressional oversight of any kind— whenever the president or his agents determine that security so requires. The president says that he may put himself above the law in that way because the Constitution declares that the president is commander in chief, and so no other branch of government has the constitutional right to limit or question his authority in wartime. That is a particularly frightening claim when we remember that the “war” in question will probably continue, if it ever ends, for decades. Only one institution—the Court—has the practical power to check this serious threat to American values and freedom.

You may be surprised that I have retained my enthusiasm for trusting important matters of political morality to constitutional judges. Time was when most of my colleagues in American law schools shared that enthusiasm, but they belong mainly to the blue culture, and their admiration was fueled by the Supreme Court’s steady and improving protection of individual freedom in the decades after the Second World War. Their faith in the Court has now been dampened by a cold rain of right-wing activism in the other direction. The very conservative Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas have now been joined on the Court by Bush’s new appointees—Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Samuel Alito—who are widely thought to share the convictions and agenda of those justices. There are worrying signs that the Supreme Court, now likely to be dominated by conservatives for at least another generation, will set out not only to repeal those advances in individual rights but to achieve what can only be regarded as a revolutionary change in the balance of power among institutions of government: transferring power from Congress to state legislatures and ratifying instead of denying the claims of the Bush administration to unprecedented sovereign authority.

I would regret this anticipated—though hardly inevitable—shift of the Supreme Court sharply to the right. But if we believe that the majoritarian conception of democracy is unsatisfactory and that we must embrace a partnership conception instead, then we must remember the contribution that a judicial institution with the Supreme Court’s powers can make to that latter ideal. We must not condemn judicial review as undemocratic whenever we disagree with the decisions the Court makes. I am worried, however, about an ideological administration appointing young ideological justices whose tenure on the Court will last for generations, long after the nation has steered itself back to the middle as, so far, it always has. Judicial appointments have become more political, and presidents use them strategically to play to particular constituencies. Presidents also take greater care not to be surprised in the way presidents once were. Dwight Eisenhower said that he had made two major mistakes in his administration and that they were both on the Supreme Court. He meant Chief Justice Earl Warren and Justice William Brennan, who became very liberal justices once on the Court. Presidents are much more careful now, and such mistakes are less likely, though of course not impossible.

I would recommend this change: we should amend the Constitution to institute a term limit for Supreme Court justices, a maximum of fifteen years’ tenure, perhaps. I know that some of our greatest judges served much longer terms than that, and I understand that in adjudication, as in many things, experience counts and practice may make perfect. I also understand that scheduled retirements would allow litigants to make strategic decisions about when to institute a case that may come before the Court. Still, I think the dangers of ideological judges serving for many decades are too great to continue to run the risk. If we did establish a term limit for Supreme Court justices, the limit would of course have to apply only to justices appointed after the change. And we would have to think of what to do with ex-justices, some of whom would be much too young to retire to write their memoirs. They could not be allowed to take up corporate appointments or law firm partnerships or to run for public office; the risk of an appearance of corruption while on the bench would be too great. But they could be appointed to lower courts, and they could, if the indignity were not too great, take up teaching in law schools, where the only possible corruption would be a benign penchant for praising their own opinions.

===============================================================================

➀ Bruce Ackerman and James Fishkin, Deliberation Day (Yale University Press, 2004).

➁ See Dworkin, Sovereign Virtue, chapter 4.

➂ The campaign finance decision is Buckley v. Vallejo, 424 U.S. 1 (1974). For my argument that that decision was wrong, see Sovereign Virtue, chapter 10.