Epilogue

I said that I wanted to start an argument, and I’ve done my best. I hope that whether you belong to the red nation or the blue, you have found something in what I’ve said to argue about and not only to cheer or hate. I set out, in the beginning, two basic principles of human dignity that I can now restate with certain refinements I added later. These principles hold, first, that each human life is intrinsically and equally valuable and, second, that each person has an inalienable personal responsibility for identifying and realizing value in his or her own life. I argued that almost all Americans—and almost all citizens of other nations with similar political cultures—can embrace these two principles, indeed that they could not consistently reject either without abandoning ethical or religious commitments they cherish. I claimed that these principles can serve as common ground on which Americans who are now very deeply divided about politics can construct what we now, to our shame, lack: a real political argument.

Abstract principles are useless without concrete illustrations; I tried to defend my claims by showing how these two principles bear on four issues of particularly heated political controversy now: human rights and terrorism, religion in our public life, taxation and the redistribution of economic resources, and the character and procedures of democracy. In a few years we may be locked into very different controversies. We may have stopped talking about Hurricane Katrina, the alternative minimum tax, and gay marriage and begun to occupy ourselves more seriously with genetic engineering, global warming, or our responsibilities to desperately poor people in far-away countries. But the two basic dimensions of dignity will remain, and they will still command our respect. The principles are not in themselves political, but they have striking political implications because anyone who accepts them must also accept that a government compromises its legitimacy when it does not provide equal concern for everyone over whom it claims dominion or does not protect the rights that people need in order to exercise personal responsibility for their own lives.

I relied on these dimensions of dignity to argue for political positions that I believe form the best understanding of liberalism now. I suggested, among other claims, that any adequate theory of human rights insists that a nation not injure anyone in the way its laws and traditions forbid it to injure its own citizens; that only a tolerant secular state respects the personal responsibility of its citizens for ethical value; that a legitimate state must aim at ex ante equality through a tax structure inspired by the old political ideal of a collective insurance pool; and that democracy requires a culture of political argument and respect, not just naked majority rule. At each stage of this argument I challenged those who disagree with the liberalism I defend—either from the Left or from the Right—to construct an argument toward different conclusions, beginning in different interpretations of the two principles.

I did my best to suggest the direction that these contrary arguments might take. Many people believe that relaxing our concern for personal privacy, civil liberties, and legal safeguards is not unfair but only a sensible response to genuine, terrible threats to our safety; that a new emphasis on religion in our politics and government is only fair, given that most Americans believe in God and want that emphasis; that fairness as well as efficiency demands a tax policy that rewards achievement; and that Americans are entitled to the kind of politics they find most congenial even if the few intellectuals who talk about deliberative democracy would prefer a more cerebral brand. I propose that we debate which of these radically different sets of political positions—the liberal principles I set out or these more conservative alternatives—better captures and expresses the deeper values locked into the two principles of dignity. I have set out my side of that argument. Those who disagree can and I hope will construct stronger counterarguments than I have managed.

Some people who do take up that challenge might prefer a different strategy, however. If they discover or come to suspect that the political positions they favor actually do contradict one or the other of those two principles, they might then prefer to reject the principles rather than to change their politics. That is not always an impermissible strategy. We often test principles by speculating about their consequences in practice and then rejecting the principles if we cannot abide those consequences. The strategy would be fatal in this case, however, because the principles I describe are for most of us such deep premises of our entire structures of value that we could not in fact abandon them. We could only tell ourselves that we have and then lead deeply inauthentic lives. We cannot give up the idea that it is really important how we live our lives or that how we live is finally our own responsibility.

Other readers might be tempted to dispose of the challenge in a different way: by ignoring it altogether. Many people have no interest in philosophical challenges to their settled political preferences. They do not wish to ask themselves whether they can square those preferences with principles about life and dignity that they would be uncomfortable rejecting. They treat their politics as a matter of flat allegiance, not reasoned decision, as fans treat baseball teams. They delight in cartoons of a simian President Bush dragging his hands on the ground or in books with titles like How to Talk to a Liberal (If You Must).➀ Real argument or introspection is the last thing they have in mind. They achieve this state of mind through a rigid intellectual compartmentalization: they lock their personal ideals of value and dignity in a separate chamber of their personalities that is well insulated from their politics. They can embrace fully humane ideas about the importance of human life and then vote for politicians who promise to cut social welfare programs; they can insist on their own personal responsibility for religious faith and then applaud politicians who promise to create a Christian country.

This insulation is morally irresponsible. For almost all of us, politics is the chief moral theater of our lives. The choices we make together in voting and lobbying are enormously consequential, and it is shabby not to confront those choices demanding of ourselves full personal integrity. In chapter 1 I said that we show contempt for ourselves when we have inadequate concern for the dignity of others—for the importance of their lives and their responsibility for those lives. We compound that self-contempt when we work to make ourselves unaware of it; compartmentalization is not only a serious moral failure but a grave failure in personal dignity as well. This book’s premise is that enough Americans value their self-respect to make a difference.

Is it possible to bring genuine democracy to America? I’ve offered many reasons for supposing not, and you may think that the great political improbability of many of the changes I’ve suggested only reinforces my apparent pessimism. But I should tell you as I close that I myself retain a perhaps perverse optimism because there is so much good and wise in our country. We are now, I think, in a particularly depressing and dangerous period of our history. But if you take a longer perspective, you may share some of my hope. Americans of goodwill, intelligence, and ambition have given the world, over the last two centuries, much of what is best in it now.

We gave the world the idea of a constitution protecting the rights of minorities, including religious dissenters and atheists, a constitution that has been the envy of other nations and is now increasingly, at least indirectly, an inspiration for them. We gave the world a lesson in national generosity after the Second World War, and we gave it leadership then in its new enthusiasm for international organization and international law. We gave it the idea, striking in mid-twentieth-century Europe, that social justice is not the preserve of socialism; we gave it the idea of an egalitarian capitalism and, in the New Deal, a serious if limited step toward that achievement. These are the very ideas and ideals that many people in the rest of the world think we have now abandoned. But the roots of the love of dignity in our national character that allowed us to lead in these ways cannot entirely have withered. I called for argument in this book, and you may think that I have now, at the very end, fallen back only on faith. You may be right. But argument is pointless without faith in those with whom you argue.

===============================================================================

➀ Ann Coulter, How to Talk to a Liberal (If You Must) (Crown Forum, 2004).